PART 2 – DEFINITIONS
§ 39.2000 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this Chapter, unless the context
requires otherwise, the following terms and their
derivations shall have the meanings provided
below:
A
Access Easement – An easement granted for the
purpose of ingress and egress which crosses a
property or properties owned by others.
Accessory Alternative Energy System – A
system accessory to a primary structure or use
that converts energy into a usable form such as
electricity or heat, and conveys that energy to
uses allowed on the premises. An Accessory
Alternative Energy System is a solar thermal,
photovoltaic or wind turbine structure, or group
of structures designed to offset all or part of the
annual energy requirements of the property.
Accessory Building – A subordinate building,
the use of which is clearly incidental to that of
the main building on the same lot.
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) - An interior,
attached, or detached dwelling unit, the use of
which is clearly accessory and incidental to that
of a lawfully established single -family dwelling
on the same Lot of Record.  For purposes of this
definition, interior means the ADU is located
within a building that was not originally designed
or used as an ADU.  Attached means at least a
portion of one wall or floor of the ADU is
connected to a building.  Detached means the
ADU is not connected to any other building.  A
structure that qualifies as an apartment, duplex
dwelling, two-unit dwelling, multi-plex dwelling
structure, an accessory building, or an accessory
structure is not an ADU.

Accessory Use – A lawful use that is
customarily subordinate and incidental to a
primary use on a lot.
Accessway – A private road which is not a part
of a lot or parcel and which provides access to
more than one lot or parcel.
Adult Bookstore – An establishment having, as
a substantial or significant portion of its
merchandise, such items as books, magazines,
other publications, films, video tapes or video
discs which are for sale, rent or viewing on
premises and which are distinguished by their
emphasis on matters depicting specific sexual
activities.
Agri-Tourism Event - A commercial event or
activity that is incidental and subordinate to the
existing farm use and that is significantly and
directly related to and supportive of that farm
use. Any assembly of persons for such an event
or activity shall be for the purpose of taking part
in agriculturally based operations, events or
activities such as classes about animal or crop
care, cooking or cleaning farm products, or
tasting farm products; learning about farm or
ranch operations; or other similar events and
activities relating to the farm uses on that farm.
Farm-to-plate meals are agri-tourism events if
more than 50 percent of the food making up the
farm-to-plate meal comes from farm crops or
livestock grown on the farm or on other farms
within the “local agricultural area” as that term
is defined in MCC 39.8875. Agri-tourism does
not include commercial events or activities that
are not incidental and subordinate to the existing
farm use and do not directly relate to and
support that use, including but not limited to
celebratory gatherings, weddings, concerts,
corporate retreats, sporting events, amusement
park rides, or similar activities where the
primary focus is the underlying cause for the
event or activity rather than the farm operation.
Agricultural Building – Pursuant to ORS
455.315 and any amendments made thereto,
means a structure located on a farm or forest
operation and used for:
(a) Storage, maintenance or repair of farm or
forest machinery and equipment;
(b) The raising, harvesting and selling of
crops or forest products;
(c) The feeding, breeding, management and
sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry,
fur-bearing animals or honeybees;
2-2 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(d) Dairying and the sale of dairy products;
or
(e) Any other agricultural, forestry or
horticultural use or animal husbandry, or
any combination thereof, including the
preparation and storage of the produce
raised on the farm for human use and animal
use, the preparation and storage of forest
products and the disposal by marketing or
otherwise, of farm produce or forest
products.
(f) An agricultural building may be used for
uses in addition to the uses listed above if
the additional uses:
 (i) Are incidental and accessory to the
uses listed above;
 (ii) Are personal to the farm owner and
the farm owner’s immediate family or
household; and
 (iii) Do not pose a greater hazard to
persons or property than the uses listed
above.
(g) Agricultural and forest practice buildings
do not include a dwelling, a structure used
for a purpose other than growing plants in
which 10 or more persons are present at any
one time, a structure regulated by the State
Fire Marshal pursuant to ORS chapter 476, a
structure used by the public, or a structure
subject to sections 4001 to 4127, title 42,
United States Code (the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968) as amended, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
Agricultural Land –
(a) Land of predominantly Class I, II, III and
IV soils, as identified in the Soil Capability
Classification System of the United States
Soil Conservation Service.
(b) Other land suitable for farm use, taking
into consideration soil fertility, suitability
for grazing, climatic conditions, existing and
future availability of water for farm
irrigation purposes, existing land use
patterns, technological and energy inputs
required, and accepted farming practices;
and,
(c) Land in other soil classes which is
necessary to permit farm practices to be
undertaken on adjacent or nearby lands.
Agricultural Support Service – As used in the
rural communities of Orient and Pleasant Home,
a commercial or industrial use that provides
products or services to farm operations in the
rural area.  Examples include farm equipment
sales, service, and rental, feed store, farm
chemical sales.
Agriculture – The tilling of the soil, the raising
of crops, dairying and/or animal husbandry, but
not including the keeping or raising of fowl,
pigs, or furbearing animals unless such is clearly
incidental to the principal use of the property for
the raising of crops.
Agriculture Fill – Ground disturbing activity in
the form of topsoil deposition to support a
farming practice.
Airport – See Aircraft Landing Field.
Aircraft Landing Field – Any landing area,
runway or other facility designed, used or
intended to be used either publicly or by any
person or persons for the landing or taking off of
aircraft and including all necessary taxiways,
aircraft storage, tie-down areas, hangars, and
other necessary buildings and open spaces.
Alley – A minor way which is used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Alteration – May be a change in construction,
including a Structural Alteration, or a change of
occupancy. When the term is applied to a change
in construction, it is intended to apply to any
change, addition, or modification in
construction. When the term is used in
connection with a change of occupancy, it is
intended to apply to change of occupancy from
one trade or use to another or from one division
of trade or use to another.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-3
(S-1 2023)
Alteration (Structural) – Includes, but is not
limited to, any change in the external
dimensions of a building; and any change or
repair which would tend to prolong the life of
the supporting members of a building or
structure, such as alteration of bearing walls,
foundation, columns, beams or girders.
Apartment – Any building or portion thereof
used for or containing three or more dwelling
units.
Applicant – The record owner or owners of a
unit, area or tract of land proposing land
development activities covered by this Chapter
and includes the authorized representative of the
record owner or owners.
Approval Authority – The Planning
Commission, Hearings Officer or Planning
Director authorized to grant approvals as
specified in this Chapter.
Archeological Resource – A district, site,
building, structure or artifact which possesses
material evidence of life and culture of the pre-
contact and historic past.
B
Board – The Board of County Commissioners
of Multnomah County, Oregon.
Buffer – See Setback.
Building – Any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building Height –
(a) The vertical distance above a reference
datum measured to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the average height of the
highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The reference datum shall be selected by
either of the following, whichever yields a
greater height of building:
1. The elevation of the highest adjoining
sidewalk or ground surface within a 5–
foot horizontal distance of the exterior
wall of the building when such sidewalk
or ground surface is not more than 10
feet above the lowest grade.
2. An elevation 10 feet higher than the
lowest grade when the sidewalk or
ground surface described in Item (1)
above is more than 10 feet above the
lowest grade.
(b) The height of a stepped or terraced
building is the maximum height of any
segment of the building, or as amended by
the State of Oregon Structural Specialty
Code and Fire and Life Safety Regulations.
Building Line – A horizontal line that coincides
with the front side of the main building.
Building Permit – A permit required pursuant
to MCC Chapter 29, certifying compliance with
all applicable building regulations.
C
Camp – See Campground.
Campground – An area improved with a
campsite and/or used for an overnight temporary
stay for vacation, recreational or emergency
purposes that may be occupied by a tent, travel
trailer or recreational vehicle or other similar
piece of equipment, but not for residential
purposes.
Campsite – An area improved for the purpose
of locating a tent, travel trailer or recreational
vehicle or other similar piece of equipment used
for vacation, recreational or emergency
purposes, but not for residential purposes.  A
campsite may include such improvements as
picnic benches, water, electrical & sewage hook-
ups, grills, fire rings, etc. or as otherwise
allowed in the base zone.
Car Wash (Convenience) – Mechanical
facilities for the washing or waxing of private
automobiles, light trucks and vans, but not
commercial fleets, as an accessory use to an
automobile service station.
2-4 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
Car Wash (Full Service or Self-Service) –
Mechanical facilities for the washing, waxing
and vacuuming of automobiles, light trucks and
vans.
Certified Engineering Geologist – Any person
who has obtained certification by the State of
Oregon as an engineering geologist.
Clinic – A place in which out-patients are given
health related treatment and in which one or
more health related professionals practice.
Commercial Use – As used in the rural
communities of Orient and Pleasant Home,
commercial use means the use of land primarily
for the retail sale of products or services,
including offices. It does not include
warehouses, freight terminals, or wholesale
distribution centers.
Commission – The Planning Commission
established under this Chapter.
Community – Any State or area or political
subdivision thereof, or any tribal government or
authorized tribal organization which has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain
management regulations for the areas within its
jurisdiction.
Community Plan – The Community Plan or
Rural Area Plan of a specific area adopted as a
component of the Comprehensive Plan.
Comprehensive Plan – The Comprehensive
Plan adopted by Multnomah County, including
any plan or plan element adopted as a
component of the Comprehensive Plan (also
referred to as “Plan”). Comprehensive Plan shall
have the meaning set forth in subsection (4) of
ORS 197.015; shall be directed to the elements
listed in the statewide use planning goals
adopted pursuant to ORS 197.240; shall include
framework, development and operational plans
based on an inventory and cultural data; shall be
prepared under the supervision of the Planning
Director and may include maps, a text, or both.
Cooking Facilities – Facilities such as a range,
stove, oven, hotplate, microwave, or similar
facilities, but not including a facility designed
primarily for room heating, such as a wood or
pellet stove.
Corner Lot – See Lot (Corner).
Cottage Industry – A processing, assembling,
packaging or storage industry, generally
employing fewer than 20 persons, conducted
wholly within an enclosed building located on a
site isolated from other such uses, generating
low traffic volumes and with little or no noise,
smoke, odor, dust, glare or vibration detectable
at any property line.
County Road – A public road that is maintained
by the County and has been designated as a
county road under ORS 368.016.
Customer – Has its common meaning and
includes a client as well as each person visiting
the premises of a business for business reasons
that is not an employee of the business.
Cut – When used in the context of ground
disturbing activity:
(A) An excavation;

(B) The difference between a point on the
original ground surface and the point of
lowest elevation on the final grade.

(C) The material removed in excavation
work.
D
Daily Care – Daily care includes but is not
limited to bathing, grooming, eating, medication
management, walking and transportation.  Daily
care does not include financial management or
the improvement or maintenance of property.
Date of Creation and Existence – As used in
the EFU and CFU base zones and applicable
only to certain standards for approval of a
dwelling in those base zones, when a lot, parcel
or tract is reconfigured pursuant to applicable
law after November 4, 1993, the effect of which
is to qualify a Lot of Record or tract for the
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-5
(S-1 2023)
siting of a dwelling, the date of the
reconfiguration is the date of creation or
existence. Reconfigured means any change in
the boundary of the lot of record or tract.
Day Nursery – A facility for the provision of
care during a portion of a 24– hour day for five
or more children not related to nor the wards of
the attending adult. A Day Nursery with 12 or
fewer children is distinguished from Family Day
Care either by:
(a) Location in a non-residential structure;
or,
(b) Provision of care by someone other than
a resident of the home.
Days – Calendar days, not business days unless
specifically provided otherwise.
Development – Any act requiring a permit
stipulated by Multnomah County Ordinances as
a prerequisite to the use or improvement of any
land, including, but not limited to, a building,
land use, occupancy, sewer connection or other
similar permit, and any associated ground
disturbing activity. As the context allows or
requires, the term “development” may be
synonymous with the term “use” and the terms
“use or development” and “use and
development.”
Development Permit  – Any permit required by
this Chapter or other Multnomah County
Ordinances as a prerequisite to the use or
improvement of any land and includes a
building, land use, occupancy, sewer connection
or other similar permit.
Director – The Director of Multnomah County
Department of Community Services or the
Director's delegate.
Disturbed Area – When used in reference to
ground disturbing activity, the area where
ground disturbing activity is occurring or has,
will or is proposed to occur.
Drive-In – An establishment so developed with
a driveway, drive-up or drive-through facility or
parking area that services are supplied in whole
or in part to a customer in a motor vehicle, or in
the case of self-service food or drink, for
consumption outside the building.
Driveway – See private driveway.
Dwelling Unit – A single unit providing
complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
Dwelling (Duplex or Two-Unit) – A detached
building designed for two dwelling units,
whether in separate or single ownership.
Dwelling (Single Family Detached) – A
detached building designed for one dwelling unit
including Mobile Homes.
Dwelling (Multi-Plex Structure) – See Multi-
plex Dwelling Structure.
Duplex Dwelling – See Dwelling (Duplex or
Two Unit).
E
Earth Materials – Any rock, natural soil or any
combination thereof.  Earth materials do not
include non-earth or processed materials
including, but not limited to, construction debris
(e.g., concrete, asphalt, wood), organic waste
(e.g., cull fruit, food waste) and industrial
byproducts (e.g., slag, wood waste).
Educational Institution – A college or
university supported by public or private funds,
tuitions, contributions or endowments, giving
advanced academic instruction as approved by a
recognized accrediting agency, including
collegiate residences, excluding elementary and
high schools, and trade and commercial schools.
Elementary School – See School (Primary,
Elementary or High).
Emergency/Disaster – A sudden unexpected
occurrence, either the result of human or natural
forces, necessitating immediate action to prevent
or mitigate significant loss or damage to life,
health, property, essential public services, or the
environment.
2-6 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
Emergency/Disaster Response – Actions
involving any development (such as new
structures or ground disturbing activity) or
vegetation removal that must be taken
immediately in response to an
emergency/disaster event (as defined above).
Emergency/disaster response actions not
involving any structural development or ground-
disturbing activity (such as emergency transport
vehicles, communications activities or traffic
control measures) are not included in this
definition and are not affected by these
provisions.
Employee – Has its common meaning in
addition to which each participant in the
promotion of a business constitutes one
employee, whether participating full or part time
and whether a resident or non-resident of a
dwelling unit on the lot authorized for a Type A,
Type B or Type C Home Occupation or a Home
Based Business use.
Equine Facility – Pursuant to ORS 455.315(2)
[2005] and any amendments made thereto,
means a building located on a farm and used by
the farm owner or the public for: Stabling or
training equines; or Riding lessons and training
clinics.  “Equine facility” does not mean:
(a) A dwelling;

(b) A structure in which more than 10
persons are present at any one time;

(c) A structure regulated by the State Fire
Marshal pursuant to ORS chapter 476;
or

(d) A structure subject to sections 4001 to
4127, title 42, United States Code (the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968)
as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
Erosion – The wearing away of the ground
surface or other earth layer, whether dry,
submerged or submersible, due to the forces of
wind, water ice gravity, or other element.
Excavation – The motorized removal of earth
material or other motorized activity resulting in
the exposure of the ground surface or other earth
layer to wind, water, ice, gravity, or other
element, including, but not limited to, cutting,
digging, grading, stripping, trenching, dredging,
bulldozing, benching, terracing, mining or
quarrying, and vegetation or tree removal.  Work
conducted by hand without the use of motorized
equipment is not excavating.
Existence – To continue to be in being; to
remain.
Expansion – Any change in the external
dimensions of the building or structure and any
change to the external footprint.
Exterior Lighting – Artificial outdoor
illumination as well as artificial outdoor
illuminating devices or fixtures, whether
permanent or temporary, including, but not
limited to, illumination and illuminating devices
or fixtures emanating from or attached to: the
exterior of buildings, including under canopies
and overhangs; structures, such as poles, fences
or decks; the interior or exterior of open-air
structures or buildings, such as gazebos,
pergolas, and breezeways; and the ground, a tree
or other natural feature.
F
Family –
(a) Any one of the following shall be
considered a family when living together as
a single housekeeping unit within a dwelling
unit (excluding servants):
1. An individual or two or more persons
related by blood, marriage, legal
adoption, foster care or guardianship; or,
2. A group of not more than five (5)
unrelated persons; or,
3. Residential Home – A residence for
(5) or fewer unrelated mentally or
physically handicapped persons and
staff persons who need not be related to
each other or any other home resident. A
residential home must be registered as
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-7
(S-1 2023)
an Adult Care Home with the
Multnomah County Department of
County Human Services pursuant to
Chapter 23 of the Multnomah County
Code.
(b) Each group described herein or portion
thereof, shall be considered a separate
family.
Family Day Care – A residence where 12 or
fewer children are provided care during a
portion of a 24– hour day by an adult residing
within said residence. Minor children of the
provider shall be included in the 12– child limit
if also cared for in the home.
Farming Practice – As defined in ORS 30.930.
Fast Food Service – The retail sales in a
building of convenience food or specialty menu
items, and ordered and served at a counter or
window whether for consumption on or off the
premises, when the facility is designed primarily
to serve customers arriving by automobile Such
food items include, but are not limited to, dairy
products, donuts, fish and chips, fried chicken,
hamburgers, hot dogs, ice cream, pizza,
sandwiches, soft drinks or tacos.
Feed Lot – Any pen, corral or structure wherein
livestock are maintained in close quarters for the
purpose of fattening for market.
Fill – The deposit (noun or verb) of any earth
materials by motorized means for any purpose,
including, but not limited to, stockpiling,
storage, dumping, raising elevation or
topography, and tracking materials such as mud
onto a road surface with vehicle tires.  Work
conducted by hand without the use of motorized
equipment is not filling. For the purposes of this
code, fill does not include materials included in
a design by a registered professional engineer to
physically support and/or protect a structure or
access road for essential and public facilities
subject to earthquake or tsunami building code
requirements of the Oregon Structural Specialty
Code.
Findings – A written statement of facts,
conclusions and determinations based on the
evidence presented in relation to the approval
criteria and prepared by the Approval Authority
in support of a decision.
Flag Lot – A lot or parcel which includes a
private driveway as part thereof.
Flood or Flooding – A general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
 (a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters,
and/or
 (b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff of surface waters from any source
Flood Plain – Those land areas which are
susceptible to inundation by flood waters.
Floor Area – The area included within the
surrounding exterior walls of a building or
portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and
courts. The floor area of a building, or portion
thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior
walls shall be the usable area under the
horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.
Forest Land – The designation of forest lands
shall be according to the United States Forest
Service Manual Field Instructions for Integrated
Forest Survey and Timber Management
Inventories Oregon, Washington and California,
1974 and shall include:
(a) Land composed of existing forested land
suitable for commercial forest uses;
(b) Other forested lands needed for
watershed protection, wildlife and fisheries
habitat and recreation;
(c) Land on which extreme conditions of
climate, soil and topography require the
maintenance of vegetative cover; and,
(d) Other forested land in urban and
agricultural areas which provides an urban
buffer, wind break, wildlife and fisheries
habitat, livestock habitat, scenic corridor or
recreational use.
2-8 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
Forest Practice – As defined in ORS 30.930.
Forest Practice Building – See Agricultural
Building.
Forest Practices Setback – A type of
dimensional setback in the forest base zones that
provides for separation between structures and
property lines. This setback assures that
accepted forestry practices can occur on adjacent
properties without the adjacent property owner
needing to alter those practices due to the close
proximity of a dwelling or structure.
Front Lot Line – See Lot Line (Front).
Frontage – That portion of a lot on one side of a
street between two intersecting streets,
accessways or other rights-of-way (crossing or
terminating), measured along the line of the
street, or, for a dead-end street or an accessway,
all the property between an intersecting street or
other right-of-way and the dead-end of the street
or accessway.
Front Yard – See Yard (Front).
Future street plan -- A plan approved by the
Hearings Officer or Planning Commission, as
appropriate, for the continuation into nearby
property of any street in an Urban Area Type 1
Land Division to facilitate the future division of
the nearby land according to the provisions of
this Chapter.
G
Geotechnical Engineer – A Civil Engineer,
licensed to practice in the State of Oregon, who
by training, education and experience is
competent in the practice of geotechnical or soils
engineering practices.
Grade (Adjacent Ground Elevation) – The
lowest point of elevation of the finished surface
of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the
area between the building and the property line,
or, when the property line is more than five feet
from the building, between the building and a
line five feet from the building, or as amended
by the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code
and Fire and Life Safety Regulations.
Gravel – Aggregate composed of hard and
durable stones or pebbles, crushed or uncrushed,
more than half of which is retained on a No. 4
sieve (2 mm).
Grazing – The use of land for pasture of horses,
cattle, sheep, goats, and/or other domestic
herbivorous animals, alone or in conjunction
with agricultural pursuits.
Ground Disturbing Activity – Any excavating
or filling or combination thereof.
Group Care Facility – A building or buildings
on contiguous property used to house six or
more handicapped or socially dependent
persons. This definition includes the definitions
of Residential Care Facility, Residential
Training Facility, and Residential Treatment
Facility contained in ORS 443.400(5), (7) and
(9).
H
Habitable Dwelling – An existing dwelling
that:
(a) Has intact exterior walls and roof
structure;
(b) Has indoor plumbing consisting of a
kitchen sink, toilet and bathing facilities
connected to a sanitary waste disposal
system;
 (c) Has interior wiring for interior lights;
 (d) Has a heating system; and
 (e) Was lawfully established.
Health Hardship – A specific person’s need for
daily supervision due to cognitive impairment
and/or a specific person’s need for assistance
with daily care as a result of age, physical
impairment and/or poor health.
Hearings Officer – A person appointed to
conduct public hearings and take action in action
proceedings as specified by this Chapter.
High School – See School (Primary, Elementary
or High).
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-9
(S-1 2023)
Highway (State) – Any road or highway
designated as such by law or by the Oregon
Transportation Commission; includes both
primary and secondary State highways.
Historical Building – Any building or structure
designated under a local government landmark
or historic district ordinance, or entered in the
National Register of Historic Places, or listed in
the Oregon State Inventory of Historical Sites,
Buildings, and Properties Approved for
Nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places by the State of Oregon Advisory
Committee on Historic Preservation.
Historical Landmark – Any building,
structure, or physical object and the premises on
which it is located which is recognized to be of
particular cultural, aesthetic, educational, or
historical significance under the Historical Site
Criteria of the Comprehensive Plan.
Historical Resources – Those districts, sites,
buildings, structures and artifacts which have a
relationship to events or conditions of the human
past.
Horticulture – The cultivation of plants, garden
crops, trees and/or nursery stock.
Hotel – Any building containing six or more
rooms designed to be used, or which are used,
by paying guests for sleeping purposes.I
Industrial Use – As used in the rural
communities of Orient and Pleasant Home,
industrial use means the use of land primarily
for the manufacture, processing, storage, or
wholesale distribution of products, goods, or
materials.  It does not include commercial uses.
J
Junk Yard – The use of more than 200 square
feet of the area of any lot, or the use of any
portion of that half of any lot, but not exceeding
a depth or width, as the case may be, of 100 feet
which half adjoins any street, for the dismantling
or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles or
machinery, or for the storage or keeping of the
parts or equipment resulting from such
dismantling or wrecking or for the storage or
keeping of junk, including scrap metals or other
scrap material.
K
Kennel – Any lot or premises on which four or
more dogs, more than six months of age, are
kept.
L
Landscaping or Landscaped – The
improvement of land by means such as
contouring, planting, and the location of outdoor
structures, furniture, walkways and similar
features.
Landslide – Any downward slope movement of
earth material, including, but not limited to, soil
creep, debris flow, mudflow, earth flow,
mudslide, rock slide, rotational slide, slide,
slump, slope failure, block failure, rock fall, fall,
topple, and spread.
Large Fill – The cumulative deposit of more
than 5,000 cubic yards of fill to a site within the
20-year period preceding the date of an
application for a Large Fill permit and including
the fill proposed in the Large Fill permit
application.  Fill physically supporting and/or
protecting a structure or access road for essential
and public facilities subject to earthquake or
tsunami building code requirements of the
Oregon Structural Specialty Code is not
included in this 5,000 cubic yard calculation. For
purposes of this definition, the term site shall
mean either a single lot of record or contiguous
lots of record under same ownership, whichever
results in the largest land area. For purposes of
this definition, the phrase same ownership shall
refer to greater than possessory interests held by
the same person or persons, spouse, minor age
child, same partnership, corporation, trust or
other entity, separately, in tenancy in common or
by other form of title. Ownership shall be
deemed to exist when a person or entity owns or
controls ten percent or more of a lot or parcel,
whether directly or through ownership or control
or an entity having such ownership or control.
For the purposes of this definition, the seller of a
property by sales contract shall be considered to
not have possessory interest.
2-10 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
Large Winery –
(a) A farm operation that owns and is sited
on a tract of 80 acres or more, at least 50
acres of which is a vineyard; and
(b) The winery owns at least 80 additional
acres of planted vineyards in Oregon that
need not be contiguous to the acreage
described in subsection A of this definition;
and
(c) The winery has produced annually, at the
same or a different location, at least 150,000
gallons of wine from grapes in at least three
of the five calendar years before the winery
was established as a large winery.
Lawfully Established Dwelling – A dwelling
that was constructed in compliance with the laws
in effect at the time of establishment. The laws
in effect shall include zoning, land division and
building code requirements. Compliance with
Building Code requirements shall mean that all
permits necessary to qualify the structure as a
dwelling unit were obtained and all qualifying
permitted work completed.
Loading Space – An off-street space or berth on
the same lot or parcel with a building or use, or
contiguous to a group of buildings or uses, for
the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading
or unloading persons, merchandise or materials
and which space or berth abuts upon a street,
alley or other appropriate means of access and
egress.
Lot – A unit of land created by a subdivision of
land. Depending upon the context in which the
term appears in this Chapter, a Lot may also
mean a lot, parcel (result of partitioning), unit of
land (lawfully created by deed or land sale
contract) or area of land owned by or under the
lawful control and in the lawful possession of
one distinct ownership.
Lot Area – The total horizontal area within the
lot lines of a lot, but not including the private
driveway area of a flag lot.
Lot (Corner) – A lot which occupies an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees, formed by the
intersection of two streets or a street and an
accessway.
Lot Coverage – The area of a lot covered by a
building or buildings, expressed as a percentage
of the total lot area.
Lot Lines – The lines bounding a lot, but not the
lines bounding the private driveway portion of a
flag lot.
Lot Line (Front) – In the case of an interior lot,
a line separating the lot from the street or
accessway; in the case of a corner lot, a line
separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from
a street or accessway; and in the case of a flag
lot, the lot line closest to and most nearly
parallel with the street which serves the lot. A
minimum front lot line length is a dimensional
requirement to assure that a parcel or lot has
sufficient street frontage and lot width near the
street to accommodate a safe access driveway
and reasonable building area after considering
the required side yards.
Lot Line (Rear) – The line dividing one lot
from another and on the opposite side of the lot
from the front lot line; and in the case of an
irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet
in length within the lot, parallel to and at the
maximum distance from the front lot line.
Lot Line (Side) – Any lot line not a front or rear
lot line.
Lot Width – The horizontal distance between
the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the
lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines.
M
Maintenance – An activity that restores the
size, scope, configuration, and design of a
serviceable structure to its previously authorized
and undamaged condition. Activities that change
the size, scope and configuration of a structure
beyond its original design are not included.
Manufactured Home – See Mobile home.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-11
(S-1 2023)
Mobile Home – A structure transportable in one
or more sections, which is designed to be used
for permanent occupancy as a dwelling and
which is not constructed to the standards of the
uniform building code (the State of Oregon
Structural Specialty Code and Fire and Life
Safety Regulations). Mobile homes include
residential trailers and manufactured homes
subject to the siting provisions as specified
within the base zone:
(a) Residential Trailer – A mobile home
which was not constructed in accordance
with federal manufactured housing
construction and safety standards (HUD), in
effect after June 15, 1976. This definition
includes the State definitions of Residential
Trailers and Mobile Homes stated in the
Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 446;
(b) Manufactured Home – A mobile home
constructed in accordance with federal
manufactured housing construction and
safety standards (HUD code) in effect after
June 15, 1976;
(c) For flood plain management purposes
(MCC 39.5000 – 39.5055) only, the term
Manufactured Home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar
vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days.
Mortgage Lot – An area of land created solely
for the purposes of financing a dwelling. A
Mortgage Lot is not a Lot of Record and shall
not be conveyed separate from the Lot of Record
out of which it was described. The tax roll
accounts of the Mortgage Lot and the parent Lot
of Record shall be consolidated into one account
when title to both is secured. A Mortgage Lot
may be created only in the EFU and CFU base
zones.
Motel – Same as Hotel.
Mulch - Organic materials, such as straw, bark,
jute, coconut fibers, or nut shells spread over the
surface of the ground, especially freshly graded
or exposed soils, to prevent physical damage
from erosive agents such as stormwater,
precipitation or wind, and which shield soil
surfaces until vegetative cover or other
stabilization measures can take effect.
Multi-Plex Dwelling Structure – A row house
or town house apartment structure.
Museum – A building, room, etc. for preserving
and exhibiting artistic, historical or scientific
objects.
N
New Structure – Any structure for which a
building permit is required after July 15, 1982.
Nonconforming Use – A legally established
use, structure or physical improvement in
existence at the time of enactment or amendment
of the Zoning Code but not presently in
compliance with the use regulations of the base
zone.  A use approved under criteria that have
been modified or are no longer in effect is
considered nonconforming.
Nursing Home – A building or part thereof in
which:
(a) Convalescent and/or chronic care is
rendered in exchange for compensation to
two or more patients requiring regular on-
premise physician or nurse care.
Convalescent and/or chronic care includes,
but is not limited to, the procedures
commonly employed in nursing and caring
for the sick;
(b) Persons who are acutely ill or are
surgical or maternity cases are excluded;
(c) Qualified personnel and a consulting
physician are available at all times; and,
 (d) Isolation facilities are provided.
O
One-Hundred Year Flood Plain – Any land
area susceptible to inundation by a flood which
has a one percent probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
2-12 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
P
Parcel – A unit of land created by a partitioning
of land. Depending upon the context in which
the term appears in this Chapter, Parcel and Lot
may at times be used interchangeably.  The
term, Parcel, also includes a unit of land
(lawfully created by deed or land sale contract).
Park-Model Recreational Vehicle – A
recreational vehicle built on a single chassis,
mounted on wheels, and designed to facilitate
movement from time to time but not intended to
be towed on a regular basis and that does not
exceed 400 square feet when in the set-up mode
and designed to provide recreational seasonal or
temporary living quarters which may be
connected to utilities necessary for the operation
of installed fixtures and appliances.
Permitted Use – A use permitted in a base zone
without the need for special administrative
review and approval, upon satisfaction of the
standards and requirements of this Chapter.
Person – Means a natural person, firm,
partnership, association, social organization,
corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate,
branch of government, or any group or
combination acting as a unit.
Planning Commission – The Commission
established under MCC 39.1600.
Planning Director – The Director of the Land
Use Planning Division or the Director's delegate.
Premises – A lot with or without buildings.
Primary School – See School (Primary,
Elementary or High).
Primary Use – See Permitted Use.
Principal Use – The main use to which the
premises is devoted and the primary purpose for
which the premises exists.
Private Driveway – A private means of access
to a public road or private road which is part of
and provides access only to one lot or parcel.
Private Road – A private accessway built on a
separate lot from the lots it serves, connecting
more than one property to the local public road
system and each lot using the private road for
access has an undivided interest in the private
road.
Private Street – See private road.
Professional Office – An office containing
activities such as those offered by a physician,
surgeon, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer,
accountant, artist or teacher, but not real estate
or insurance sales.
Public Road – A road over which the public has
a right of use that is a matter of public record.
County roads, city streets, state highways,
federal roads and local access roads are all
public roads.
R
Rear Lot Line – See Lot Line (Rear).
Rear Yard – See Yard (Rear).
Recordable form – A form sufficient to create
the parcel on the date the document was signed
if the deed or land sales contract had been
recorded with the office responsible for public
records. Characteristics of recordable form
include a complete description of the property,
the consideration given, and verification of the
transaction by a witness such as a Notary Public.
Recreational Vehicle – A vehicle as defined in
ORS 446.003 and specifically includes camping
trailers, camping vehicles, motor homes,
recreational park trailers, bus conversions, van
conversions, tent trailers, travel trailers, truck
campers, combination vehicles which include a
recreational vehicle use, and any vehicle
converted for use or partial use as a recreational
vehicle. Recreational Vehicles contain eating
and sleeping facilities and are equipped with one
or more of the following:
 (a) Holding tank(s);
 (b) Liquid petroleum gas; or
 (c) A 110 to 240 volt electrical systems.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-13
(S-1 2023)
Residential Care Facility – See Group Care
Facility.
Residential Home – See Family.
Residential Trailer – See Mobile Home.
Residential Treatment Facility – See Group
Care Facility.
Restaurant – An establishment:
(a) Where food or drink is prepared for
consumption by the public;
(b) Where the public obtains food or drink
so prepared in form or quantity consumable
then and there, whether or not it is
consumed within the confines of the
premises where prepared; or
(c) That prepares food or drink in
consumable form for service outside the
premises where prepared; and
(d) Is not a bed and breakfast facility or a
seasonal temporary restaurant or single-
event temporary restaurant as defined in
ORS 624.010.
Restoration – To reconstruct a dwelling,
building or structure after it has been damaged
by fire, other casualty or natural disaster.
Replacement – The construction of a new
dwelling, building or structure to replace or
substitute for the lawfully established dwelling,
building or structure. The removal of over 75%
of the standing walls and roof structure of an
existing dwelling, building or structure qualifies
the rebuilding as a replacement dwelling,
building or structure.
Right-of-Way – Any way, street, alley or road
dedicated to the use of the public.
Road – The entire right-of-way of any public or
private way that provides ingress to, or egress
from property by vehicles or other means, or
provides travel between places by means of
vehicles. "Road" includes, but is not limited to:
(A) Ways described as streets, highways,
throughways, or alleys;
(B) Road-related structures, such as tunnels,
culverts, or similar structures, that are in the
right-of-way; and
(C) Structures such as bridges that provide
for continuity of the right-of-way.
Row House – A one-story apartment structure
having three or more dwelling units.
S
School (Trade and Commercial) – A building
or land where instruction is given to pupils in
arts, crafts or trades, and operated as a
commercial enterprise as distinguished from
schools endowed and/or supported by taxation.
School (Primary, Elementary or High) – A
public elementary or secondary school for which
attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020;
or a private or parochial elementary or
secondary school described in ORS 339.030 (1).
School (Private School) – A privately owned
primary, elementary or high school. In the
Exclusive Farm Use Zone, “private school” does
not include a nursery school, kindergarten or day
nursery except those operated in conjunction
with a school.
School (Public School) – A publicly owned
primary, elementary or high school. In the
Exclusive Farm Use Zone, “public school” does
not include a nursery school, kindergarten or day
nursery except those operated in conjunction
with a school.
Sedimentation (sediment) – The deposit in a
waterbody of any earthen material by wind,
water, ice, gravity, or other element.
Service Station – Any place operated for the
purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle
fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
Setback – At times this term is used
interchangeably with yard. However, setback
(and Buffer) may also be a needed separation
between a land use/structure and a feature of the
2-14 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
land that could be adversely impacted by the
land use/structure (e.g. between structures and
wetlands). Other setback requirements are for
such purposes as public safety or reduction of
nuisances such as the distance needed between a
guyed television transmission tower and the
property line in order to provide an area for
potential ice fall and tower failure or it may be a
distance to reduce the level of adverse noise,
odor, or visual impacts to sensitive land uses.
Shall – Shall is mandatory.
Sight-Obscuring Fence – A fence consisting of
wood, metal or masonry, or an evergreen hedge
or other evergreen planting, arranged in such a
way as to obstruct vision.
Side Lot Line – See Lot Line (Side).
Sidewalk – A pedestrian walkway with all-
weather surfacing.
Side Yard – See Yard (Side).
Single Family Detached Dwelling – See
Dwelling (Single Family Detached).
Slope –
(A) Any ground whose surface makes an
angle from the horizontal; or

(B) The face of an embankment or cut
section.
Small-Scale Low Impact Commercial or
Industrial Use [Burlington Rural Center] –
As used in the rural community of Burlington,
these terms have the following meanings:
(A) A small-scale low impact commercial
use is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 4,000 square feet of
floor space.
(B) A small-scale low impact industrial use
is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 10,000 square feet
of floor space with a maximum footprint of
5,000 square feet.
Small-Scale Low Impact Commercial or
Industrial Use [Springdale Rural Center] –
As used in the rural community of Springdale,
these terms have the following meanings:
(A) A small-scale low impact commercial
use is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 4,000 square feet of
floor space.
(B) A small-scale low impact industrial use
is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 15,000 square feet
of floor space with a maximum footprint of
7,500 square feet.
Small-Scale Low Impact Commercial or
Industrial Use [Orient Rural Center and
Orient Commercial Industrial] – As used in
the rural community of Orient, these terms have
the following meanings:
(A) A small-scale low impact commercial
use is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 4,000 square feet of
floor space.
(B) A small-scale low impact industrial use
is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 10,000 square feet
of floor space.
Small-Scale Low Impact Commercial or
Industrial Use [Pleasant Home Rural Center]
– As used in the rural community of Pleasant
Home, these terms have the following meanings:
(A) A small-scale low impact commercial
use is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 4,000 square feet of
floor space.
(B) A small-scale low impact industrial use
is one which takes place in a building or
buildings not exceeding 10,000 square feet
of floor space.
Spoil Material – Any rock, sand, gravel, soil or
other earth material removed by ground
disturbing activity.
State Highway – See Highway (State).
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 2-15
(S-1 2023)
Story – That portion of a building included
between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above, except that
the topmost story shall be that portion of a
building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
If the finished floor level directly above an
useable or unused under-floor space is more than
6 feet above grade as defined herein for more
than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any
point, such usable or unused under-floor space
shall be considered as a story, or as amended by
the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code
and Fire and Life Safety Regulations.
Street – See road.
Structural Alteration – See Alteration
(Structural).
Structure – That which is built or constructed.
An edifice or building of any kind, or any piece
of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
T
Temporary Dwelling – A detached dwelling
allowed to be placed on a lot or parcel for a
limited amount of time in addition to the
permanent, existing dwelling.  A temporary
dwelling shall be removed upon the expiration
of the land use permit authorizing it.
Timber Growing – The growing of trees for the
production of timber.
Topsoil – The top organic and mineral rich layer
of soil that provides nutrients to growing plants.
Trade School – See School (Trade and
Commercial).
Transitional Area – An area consisting of a lot,
lots, or parts of lots, within any residential base
zone, having side lot lines abutting a boundary
of a commercial or industrial base zone, and
extending not more than 100 feet from such
boundary into the residential base zone.
Transitional Use – A use allowed in a
transitional area which is intended to create a
gradual change in uses from industrial and
commercial areas to residential areas.
Travel Trailer – A non-motorized, towable
recreational trailer which contains an Oregon
Insignia of Compliance as a recreational vehicle.
Motor homes, converted buses, van conversions,
slide-in truck campers and folding camper
trailers (“pop-up” campers) are not considered a
travel trailer.
Two-Unit Dwelling – See Dwelling (Duplex or
Two-Unit).
U
Unit of Land – A unit of land created by a deed
or land sales contract in compliance with all
applicable planning, zoning, and subdivision or
partition ordinances and regulations.
W
Water Body - Any surface or ground water, or
wetland of the state or the United States,
including but not limited to, rivers, streams,
creeks, sloughs, drainageways, swales, seeps,
springs, watercourses, canals, drainages, ponds,
lakes, bays, aquifers, coastal waters, impounding
reservoirs, estuaries, marshes, and inlets,
regardless of whether perennial, intermittent,
ephemeral, or otherwise, and regardless of
whether natural or human-made.
Wetlands – Those areas that are inundated or
saturated by surface or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas.
Y
Yard – An open space, on a lot with a building
and bounded on one or more sides by such
building, such space being unoccupied and
unobstructed from 30 inches above the ground
upward, except as otherwise specified in the
base zone. A yard satisfying the yard
requirement for one building shall not satisfy the
2-16 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
yard requirement for another building. The
purpose of yards between buildings and property
lines is to provide space, light, air circulation,
and safety from fire hazards.
Yard (Front) – A yard extending across the full
width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.
Yard (Rear) – A yard extending across the full
width of the lot between the most rear building
other than an accessory building and the rear lot
line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be
measured horizontally from the nearest point of
the rear lot line toward the nearest part of the
building. Where there is no rear lot line, the
depth of the rear yard shall be the distance from
a ten foot line parallel to the front lot line,
measured from one side line to the other.
Yard (Side) – A yard between any building and
the side lot line, extending from the front yard to
the rear yard, or front lot line to rear lot line
where no front yard or rear yard is required. The
width of the required side yard shall be
measured horizontally from the nearest point of
the side lot line to the nearest part of the
building.
(Ord. 1318; Amended, 11/30/2023; Ord. 1309, Amended,
08/18/2022; Ord. 1271, Amended, 03/14/2019)
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 3-1
(S-1 2022)
