39.8000- PURPOSES.
MCC 39.8000 through 39.8050 (Design
Review) provides for the review and
administrative approval of the design of certain
developments and improvements in order to
promote functional, safe, innovative and
attractive site development compatible with the
natural and human-made environment.
§ 39.8005   ELEMENTS OF DESIGN
REVIEW PLAN.
The elements of a Design Review Plan are: The
layout and design of all existing and proposed
improvements, including but not limited to,
buildings, structures, parking and circulation
areas, outdoor storage areas, landscape areas,
service and delivery areas, outdoor recreation
areas, retaining walls, signs and graphics, cut
and fill actions, accessways, pedestrian
walkways, buffering and screening measures.
§ 39.8010  DESIGN REVIEW PLAN
APPROVAL REQUIRED.
No building, grading, parking, land use, sign or
other required permit shall be issued for a use
subject to this section, nor shall such a use be
commenced, enlarged, altered or changed until a
final design review plan is approved by the
Planning Director, under this Code.
§ 39.8015   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of MCC 39.8000 through
39.8050 shall not be applied to the following:
 (A) Single family residences.
 (B) Type C Home Occupations unless
located in the RC, BRC, OR, PH-RC or SRC
base zones.
 (C) Type C Home Occupations located in
the RC, BRC, OR, PH-RC, or SRC base zones
that require the addition of less than 400 square
feet of ground coverage.
 (D) Commercial photovoltaic solar power
generation facility.
§ 39.8020  APPLICATION OF
REGULATIONS.
 (A) Except those exempted by MCC
39.8015, the provisions of MCC 39.8000
through 39.8050 shall apply to all conditional
and community service uses, and to specified
uses, in any base zone.
 (B) Uses subject to Design Review that
require the creation of fewer than four new
parking spaces pursuant to MCC 39.6590 shall
only be subject to the following Design Review
approval criteria: MCC 39.8040(A)(1)(a) and
(1)(c), and (4) and (7), except when located in
the RC, BRC, OR, OCI, PH-RC or SRC zone
base zones.
 (C) All other uses are subject to all of the
Design Review Approval Criteria listed in MCC
39.8040 and 39.8045.
 (D) Alteration or modification of the
physical development previously reviewed
through the Design Review process shall be
subject to the Design Review Approval Criteria
listed in MCC 39.8040 and 39.8045.
 (E) In the urban bases zones the provisions
of MCC 39.8000 through 39.8050 shall apply to
the following:
  (1) A hotel or motel.
(2) A business or professional office or
clinic.
(3) A use listed in any commercial base
zone.
(4) A use listed in any manufacturing
base zone.
(Ord. 1309, Amended, 08/18/2022)
8-2 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2019)
§ 39.8025    DESIGN REVIEW PLAN
CONTENTS.
 (A) The design review application shall be
filed on forms provided by the Planning Director
and shall be accompanied by a site plan, floor
plan, architectural elevations and landscape plan,
as appropriate, showing the proposed
development.
 (B) Plans shall include the following, drawn
to scale:
(1) Access to site from adjacent rights-
of-way, streets, and arterials;
(2) Parking and circulation areas;
(3) Location, design, materials and
colors of buildings and signs;
(4) Orientation of windows and doors;
(5) Entrances and exits;
(6) Existing topography and natural
drainage;
(7) Pedestrian circulation;
(8) Boundaries of areas designated
Significant Environmental Concern,
Geologic Hazards and Areas of Special
Flood Hazards;
(9) Service areas for uses such as mail
delivery, trash disposal, above-ground
utilities, loading and delivery;
(10) Areas to be landscaped;
(11) Exterior lighting location and
design;
(12) Special provisions for handicapped
persons;
(13) Surface and storm water drainage
and on-site waste disposal systems;
(14) The size, species, and approximate
locations of plant materials to be
retained or placed on the site; and
(15) Proposed ground-disturbance,
grading, filling and site contouring.
§ 39.8030  FINAL DESIGN REVIEW
PLAN.
Prior to land use approval for building permit
review or commencement of physical
development where no additional permits are
necessary, the applicant shall revise the plans to
show compliance with the land use approvals
granted, all conditions of approval and required
modifications. Final design review plan shall
contain the following, drawn to scale:
 (A) Site Development and Landscape Plans
drawn to scale, indicating the locations and
specifications of the items described in MCC
39.8025, as appropriate;
 (B) Architectural drawings, indicating floor
plans, sections, and elevations; and
 (C) Approved minor exceptions from yard,
parking, and sign requirements.
§ 39.8035    DELAY IN THE
CONSTRUCTION OF A
REQUIRED FEATURE.
When the Planning Director determines that
immediate execution of any feature of an
approved final design review plan is impractical
due to climatic conditions, unavailability of
materials or other temporary condition, the
Director shall, as a precondition to the issuance
of a required permit under MCC 39.8010 and
39.8020, require the posting of a performance
bond, cash deposit, or other surety, to secure
execution of the feature at a time certain.
§ 39.8040  DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA.
 (A) Approval of a final design review plan
shall be based on the following criteria:
(l) Relation of Design Review Plan
Elements to Environment.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 8-3
(S-1 2022)
(a) The elements of the design
review plan shall relate
harmoniously to the natural
environment and existing buildings
and structures having a visual
relationship with the site.
(b) The elements of the design
review plan should promote energy
conservation and provide protection
from adverse weather conditions,
noise, and air pollution.
(c) Each element of the design
review plan shall effectively,
efficiently, and attractively serve its
function. The elements shall be on a
human scale, inter related, and shall
provide spatial variety and order.
(2) Safety and Privacy - The design
review plan shall be designed to provide
a safe environment, while offering
appropriate opportunities for privacy
and transitions from public to private
spaces.
(3) Special Needs of Handicapped -
Where appropriate, the design review
plan shall provide for the special needs
of handicapped persons, such as ramps
for wheelchairs and braille signs.
(4) Preservation of Natural Landscape -
The landscape and existing grade shall
be preserved to the maximum practical
degree, considering development
constraints and suitability of the
landscape or grade to serve their
functions. Preserved trees and shrubs
shall be protected during construction.
(5) Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation
and Parking - The location and number
of points of access to the site, the
interior circulation patterns, the
separations between pedestrians and
moving and parked vehicles, and the
arrangement of parking areas in relation
to buildings and structures, shall be
designed to maximize safety and
convenience and shall be harmonious
with proposed and neighboring
buildings and structures.
(6) Drainage - Surface drainage and
stormwater systems shall be designed so
as not to adversely affect neighboring
properties or streets. Systems that insure
that surface runoff volume after
development is no greater than before
development shall be provided on the
lot.
(7) Buffering and Screening - Areas,
structures and facilities for storage,
machinery and equipment, services
(mail, refuse, utility wires, and the like),
loading and parking, and similar
accessory areas and structures shall be
designed, located, buffered or screened
to minimize adverse impacts on the site
and neighboring properties.
(8) Utilities - All utility installations
above ground shall be located so as to
minimize adverse impacts on the site
and neighboring properties.
(9) Signs and Graphics - The location,
texture, lighting, movement, and
materials of all exterior signs, graphics
or other informational or directional
features shall be compatible with the
other elements of the design review plan
and surrounding properties.
 (B) Guidelines designed to assist applicants
in developing design review plans may be
adopted by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1309, Amended, 08/18/2022)

§ 39.8045  REQUIRED MINIMUM
STANDARDS.
 (A) Private and Shared Outdoor Recreation
Areas in Residential Developments:
(l) Private Areas - Each ground level
living unit in a residential development
subject to design review plan approval
shall have an accessible outdoor private
space of not less than 48 square feet in
area. The area shall be enclosed,
screened or otherwise designed to
8-4 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2019)
provide privacy for unit residents and
their guests.
(2) Shared Areas - Usable outdoor
recreation space shall be provided for
the shared use of residents and their
guests in any apartment residential
development, as follows:
(a) One or two-bedroom units: 200
square feet per unit.
(b) Three or more bed-room units:
300 square feet per unit.
 (B) Storage
 Residential Developments - Convenient
areas shall be provided in residential
developments for the storage of articles such as
bicycles, barbecues, luggage, outdoor furniture,
etc. These areas shall be entirely enclosed.
 (C) Required Landscape Areas
 The following landscape requirements are
established for developments subject to design
review plan approval:
(l) A minimum of 15% of the
development area shall be landscaped;
provided, however, that computation of
this minimum may include areas
landscaped under subpart 3 of this
subsection.
(2) All areas subject to the final design
review plan and not otherwise improved
shall be landscaped.
(3) The following landscape
requirements shall apply to parking and
loading areas:
(a) A parking or loading area
providing ten or more spaces shall
be improved with defined
landscaped areas totaling no less
than 25 square feet per parking
space.

(b) A parking or loading area shall
be separated from any lot line
adjacent to a street by a landscaped
strip at least 10 feet in width, and
any other lot line by a landscaped
strip at least 5 feet in width.
(c) A landscaped strip separating a
parking or loading area from a street
shall contain:
1. Street trees spaces as
appropriate to the species, not to
exceed 50 feet apart, on the
average;
2. Low shrubs, not to reach a
height greater than 3'0", spaced
no more than 5 feet apart, on the
average; and
3. Vegetative ground cover.
(d) Landscaping in a parking or
loading area shall be located in
defined landscaped areas which are
uniformly distributed throughout the
parking or loading area.
(e) A parking landscape area shall
have a width of not less than 5 feet.
(4) Provision shall be made for watering
planting areas where such care is
required.
(5) Required landscaping shall be
continuously maintained.
(6) Maximum height of tree species
shall be considered when planting under
overhead utility lines.
(7) Landscaped means the improvement
of land by means such as contouring,
planting, and the location of outdoor
structures, furniture, walkways and
similar features.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 8-5
(S-1 2019)
§ 39.8050  MINOR EXCEPTIONS: YARD,
PARKING, SIGN, AND
LANDSCAPE
REQUIREMENTS.
 (A) In conjunction with final design review
plan approval, the Planning Director may grant
minor exceptions from the following
requirements:
(l) Dimensional standards for yards as
required in the primary base zone;
(2) Dimensional standards for off-street
parking as required under MCC 39.6560
and 39.6565;
(3) Standards for minimum number of
off-street parking spaces as required in
the primary base zone; and
(4) Dimensional standards for signs as
required in the primary base zone;
(5) In the case of a proposed alteration,
standards for landscaped areas under
MCC 39.8045 (C).
 (B) Except under subsection (A) (5) above,
no minor exception shall be greater than 25% of
the requirement from which the exception is
granted.
 (C) Approval of a minor exception shall be
based on written findings, as required in this
subsection.
(l) In the case of a minor yard exception,
the Planning Director shall find that
approval will result in:
(a) More efficient use of the site;
(b) Preservation of natural features,
where appropriate;
(c) Adequate provision of light, air,
and privacy to adjoining properties;
and
(d) Adequate emergency accesses.

(2) In the case of a minor exception to
the dimensional standards for off-street
parking spaces or the minimum required
number of off-street parking spaces, the
Planning Director shall find that
approval will provide adequate off-street
parking in relation to user demands. The
following factors may be considered in
granting such an exception:
(a) Special characteristics of users
which indicate low demand for off-
street parking (e.g., low income,
elderly);
(b) Opportunities for joint use of
nearby off-street parking facilities;
(c) Availability of public transit;
(d) Natural features of the site
(topography, vegetation, and
drainage) which would be adversely
affected by application of required
parking standards.
(3) In the case of a minor exception to
the dimensional standards for signs, the
Planning Director shall find that
approval is necessary for adequate
identification of the use on the property
and will be compatible with the
elements of the design review plan and
with the character of the surrounding
area.
(4) In the case of a minor exception to
the standards for landscaped areas, the
Planning Director shall find that
approval is consistent with MCC
39.8000, considering the extent and type
of proposed alteration and the degree of
its impact on the site and surrounding
areas.
8-6 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2019)
8.B – ADJUSTMENTS AND VARIANCES
§
