39.4200- PURPOSE.
The purposes of the Exclusive Farm Use Base
Zone are to preserve and maintain agricultural
lands for farm use consistent with existing and
future needs for agricultural products, forests
and open spaces; to conserve and protect scenic
and wildlife resources, to maintain and improve
the quality of the air, water and land resources of
the County and to establish criteria and
standards for farm uses and related and
compatible uses which are deemed appropriate.
Land within this base zone shall be used
exclusively for farm uses as provided in the
Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 215 and the
Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 660,
Division 33 as interpreted by this Exclusive
Farm Use Subpart.
One of the implementation tools to carry out the
purposes of this base zone is a Lot of Record
requirement to group into larger “Lots of
Record” those contiguous parcels and lots that
were in the same ownership on February 20,
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-29
(S-1 2023)
1990. This requirement is in addition to all
“tract” grouping requirements of State Statute
and Rule.
§ 39.4205 AREA AFFECTED.
MCC 39.4200 through 39.4265 shall apply to
those areas designated EFU on the Multnomah
County Zoning Map.
§ 39.4210 DEFINITIONS.
As used in MCC 39.4200 through MCC
39.4265, unless otherwise noted, the following
terms and their derivations shall have the
following meanings:
Area - As used in ORS 215.203 for the
production of biofuel, “area” is limited to Clark
and Skamania counties in Washington State,
Multnomah, Columbia, Washington, Clackamas,
Yamhill, Hood River and Marion counties in
Oregon.
Campground – An area devoted to overnight
temporary use for vacation, recreational or
emergency purposes. A camping site may be
occupied by a tent, travel trailer or recreational
vehicle. Campgrounds shall not include
intensively developed recreational uses such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, retail stores or
gas stations.
Channelization – The separation or regulation
of conflicting traffic movements into definite
paths of travel by traffic islands or pavement
markings to facilitate the safe and orderly
movement of both vehicles and pedestrians.
Examples include, but are not limited to, left
turn refuges, right turn refuges including the
construction of islands at intersections to
separate traffic, and raised medians at driveways
or intersections to permit only right turns.
Channelization does not include continuous
median turn lanes.
Commercial Agricultural Enterprise – Farm
operations that will:
(1) Contribute in a substantial way to the
area's existing agricultural economy; and
(2) Help maintain agricultural processors
and established farm markets.
When determining whether a farm is part of the
commercial agricultural enterprise, not only
what is produced, but how much and the method
by which it is marketed shall be considered.
Commercial Photovoltaic Solar Power
Generation Facility – means an assembly of
equipment that converts sunlight into electricity
and then stores, transfers, or both, that
electricity.  This includes photovoltaic modules,
mounting and solar tracking equipment,
foundations, inverters, wiring, and storage
devices and other components.  Photovoltaic
solar power generation facilities also include
electrical cable collection systems connecting
the photovoltaic solar generation facility to a
transmission line, all necessary grid integration
equipment, new or expanded private roads
constructed to serve the photovoltaic solar
power generation facility, office, operation and
maintenance buildings, staging areas and all
other necessary appurtenances.  A photovoltaic
solar power generation facility does not include
a net metering pursuant to ORS 757.300 and
OAR chapter 860, division 39 or Feed-in-Tariff
project pursuant to ORS 757.365 and OAR
chapter 860, division 84.
Contiguous – refers to parcels or lots which
have any common boundary, excepting a single
point, and shall include, but not be limited to,
parcels or lots separated only by an alley, street
or other right-of-way.
Deferred Replacement Permit – is a building
permit for replacement of an existing dwelling
that allows construction of a replacement
dwelling at any time. The deferred replacement
permit may not be transferred, by sale or
otherwise, except by the applicant to the spouse
or a child of the applicant. The replacement
dwelling must comply with applicable building
codes, plumbing codes, sanitation codes and
other requirements relating to health and safety
or to siting at the time of construction.
4-30 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
Farm Operator – means a person who operates
a farm, doing the work and making the day-
today decisions about such things as planting,
harvesting, feeding and marketing.
High-Value Farm Land – means land in a tract
composed predominately of soils that are:
(1) Irrigated and classified prime, unique,
Class I or Class II; or
(2) Not irrigated and classified prime,
unique, Class I or Class II; or
(3) Willamette Valley Soils in Class III or
IV including:
(a) Subclassification IIIe specifically,
Burlington, Cascade, Cornelius,
Latourell, Multnomah, Powell,
Quatama;
(b) Subclassification IIIw specifically,
Cornelius;
(c) Subclassification IVe, specifically,
Cornelius, Latourel, Powell, and
Quatama.
Location and the extent of these soils are as
identified and mapped in "Soil Survey of
Multnomah County, published by the Soil
Conservation Service, US Department of
Agriculture, 1983."
The soil class, soil rating or other soil
designation of a specific lot or parcel may be
changed if the property owner submits a
statement or report pursuant to ORS 215.710(5).
Private School – means privately owned
primary, elementary or high school not including
nursery school, kindergarten or day nursery
except those operated in conjunction with a
school.
Public School – means publicly owned primary,
elementary or high school not including nursery
school, kindergarten or day nursery except those
operated in conjunction with a school.
Same Ownership – Refers to greater than
possessory interests held by the same person or
persons, spouse, minor age child, same
partnership, corporation, trust or other entity,
separately, in tenancy in common or by other
form of title. Ownership shall be deemed to exist
when a person or entity owns or controls ten
percent or more of a lot or parcel, whether
directly or through ownership or control or an
entity having such ownership or control.  For the
purposes of this subsection, the seller of a
property by sales contract shall be considered to
not have possessory interest.
Suitable for Farm Use – means land in Class I-
IV or "lands in other classes which are necessary
to permit farm practices to be undertaken on
adjacent or nearby lands".
Tract – means one or more contiguous lots or
parcels in the same ownership. A tract shall not
be considered to consist of less than the required
area because it is crossed by a public road or
waterway. Lots with a common boundary of
only single point are not a tract.
§ 39.4215 USES.
No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, altered or enlarged in this base zone
except for the uses listed in MCC 39.4220
through 39.4230 when found to comply with
MCC 39.4245 through 39.4260 provided such
uses occur on a Lot of Record, except those uses
listed in ORS 215.283(1) may occur on
Exclusive Farm Use zone lands regardless of Lot
of Record status of the land upon which the use
will occur.
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4220 ALLOWED USES.
The following uses and their accessory uses are
allowed, subject to all applicable supplementary
regulations contained in MCC Chapter 39.
 (A) Farm use, as defined in ORS 215.203.
 (B) Buildings other than dwellings
customarily provided in conjunction with farm
use.
 (C) The propagation or harvesting of forest
products.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-31
(S-1 2023)
 (D) Operations for the exploration for and
production of geothermal resources as defined
by ORS 522.005  and oil and gas as defined by
ORS 520.005, including the placement and
operation of compressors, separators and other
customary production equipment for an
individual well adjacent to the wellhead. Any
activities or construction relating to such
operations shall not be a basis for an exception
under ORS 197.732 (1)(a) or (b).
 (E) Operations for the exploration for
minerals as defined by ORS 517.750. Any
activities or construction relating to such
operations shall not be the basis for an exception
under ORS 197.732 (1)(a) or (b).
 (F) Climbing and passing lanes within the
right of way existing as of July 1, 1987.
 (G) Reconstruction or modification of public
roads and highways, including the placement of
utility facilities overhead and subsurface of
public roads and highways along the public
right-of-way, but not including the addition of
travel lanes, where no removal or displacement
of buildings will occur, or no new land parcels
result. Reconstruction or modification also
includes “channelization” of conflicting traffic
movements into definite paths of travel by traffic
islands or pavement markings.
 (H) Temporary public road and highway
detours that will be abandoned and restored to
original condition or use at such time as no
longer needed.
 (I) Minor betterment of existing public roads
and highway related facilities such as
maintenance yards, weigh stations and rest areas
within right of way existing as of July 1, 1987,
and contiguous public-owned property utilized
to support the operation and maintenance of
public roads and highways.
 (J) A replacement dwelling to be used in
conjunction with farm use if the existing
dwelling has been listed in a historic property
inventory as defined in ORS 358.480 and listed
on the National Register of Historic Places.
 (K) Creation of, restoration or enhancement
of wetlands.
 (L) Alteration, restoration or replacement of
a lawfully established habitable dwelling.
(1) In the case of a replacement
dwelling:
(a) The existing dwelling must be
removed, demolished or converted
to an allowable nonresidential use
within three months of the
completion of the replacement
dwelling, or
(b) If the applicant has requested a
deferred replacement permit, the
existing dwelling must be removed
or demolished within three months
after the deferred replacement
permit is issued. If, however, the
existing dwelling is not removed or
demolished within three months
after the deferred replacement
permit is issued, the permit becomes
void.
(2) A replacement dwelling may be sited
on any part of the same lot or parcel. A
dwelling established under this
paragraph shall comply with all
applicable siting standards. However,
the standards shall not be applied in a
manner that prohibits the siting of the
dwelling. If the dwelling to be replaced
is located on a portion of the lot or
parcel not zoned for exclusive farm use,
the applicant, as a condition of approval,
shall execute and record in the deed
records for the county a deed restriction
prohibiting the siting of a dwelling on
that portion of the lot or parcel. The
restriction imposed shall be irrevocable
unless a statement of release is placed in
the deed records for the county. The
release shall be signed by the county or
its designee and state that the provisions
of this paragraph regarding replacement
dwellings have changed to allow the
siting of another dwelling. The Planning
Director or the Director's designee shall
4-32 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
maintain a record of the lots and parcels
that do not qualify for the siting of a
new dwelling under the provisions of
this paragraph, including a copy of the
deed restrictions and release statements
filed under this paragraph.
(3) As a condition of approval, the
landowner shall sign and record in the
deed records for the county a document
binding the landowner, and the
landowner’s successors in interest,
prohibiting them from pursuing a claim
for relief or cause of action alleging
injury from farming practices for which
no action or claim is allowed under ORS
30.936 or 30.937.
 (M) Replacement of an existing lawfully
established single family dwelling on the same
lot not more than 200 feet from the original
building site when the dwelling was
unintentionally destroyed by fire, other casualty
or natural disaster. The dwelling may be
reestablished only to its previous nature and
extent, and the reestablishment shall meet all
other building, plumbing, sanitation and other
codes, ordinances and permit requirements. A
building permit must be obtained within one
year from the date of the event that destroyed the
dwelling.
 (N) A church, synagogue, temple, mosque,
chapel, meeting house, or other nonresidential
place of worship and cemeteries in conjunction
with a church, synagogue, temple, mosque,
chapel, meeting house or other nonresidential
place of worship, consistent with ORS 215.441,
wholly within an EFU base zone may be
maintained, enhanced or expanded:
(1) Use is subject to MCC 39.4235.
(2) No new use may be authorized on
high value farmland; and
(3) Must satisfy the requirements of
MCC 39.6500 through 39.6600, MCC
39.7525(A), MCC 39.8000 through
39.8050 and MCC 39.6745.
(4) The maintenance, enhancement or
expansion shall not adversely impact the
right to farm on surrounding EFU lands.
(5) Activities customarily associated
with the practice of religious activity
include worship services, religion
classes, weddings, funerals, meal
programs, child care, but do not include
private or parochial school education for
prekindergarten through grade 12 or
higher education.
 (O) Accessory Structures subject to the
following:
(1) The Accessory Structure is
customarily accessory or incidental to
any use permitted or approved in this
base zone and is a structure identified in
the following list;
(a) Garages or carports;
(b) Pump houses;
(c) Garden sheds;
(d) Workshops;
(e) Storage sheds, including
shipping containers used for storage
only;
(f) Greenhouses;
(g) Woodsheds;
(h) Shelter for pets, horses or
livestock and associated buildings
such as: manure storage, feed
storage, tack storage, and indoor
exercise area;
(i) Swimming pools, pool houses,
hot tubs, saunas, and associated
changing rooms;
(j) Sport courts;
(k) Gazebos, pergolas, and detached
decks;
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-33
(S-1 2023)
(l) Fences, gates, or gate support
structures; and
(m) Mechanical equipment such as
air conditioning units, heat pumps
and electrical boxes; and
(n) Similar structures.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental unit, sleeping
quarters or any other residential use.
(3) The Accessory Structure may
contain one sink.
(4) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain:
(a) More than one story;
(b) Cooking Facilities;
(c) A toilet;
(d) Bathing facilities such as a
shower or bathing tub;
(e) A mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item
designed to aid in sleep as a primary
purpose, unless such item is
disassembled for storage; or
(f) A closet built into a wall.
(5) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
(6) The combined footprints of all
Accessory Buildings on a Lot of Record
shall not exceed 2,500 square feet.
(7) An Accessory Structure exceeding
any of the Allowed Use provisions
above shall be considered through the
Review Use provisions.
(8) Buildings in conjunction with farm
uses as defined in ORS 215.203 are not
subject to these provisions. Such
buildings shall be used for their allowed
farm purposes only and, unless so
authorized, shall not be used, whether
temporarily or permanently, as a
primary dwelling, accessory dwelling
unit, apartment, guesthouse, housing
rental unit, sleeping quarters or any
other residential use.
 (P) Structures or fenced runs for the shelter
or confinement of poultry or livestock.
 (Q) Type A home occupation pursuant to
MCC 39.8800.
 (R) Actions taken in response to an
emergency/disaster event as defined in MCC
39.2000 pursuant to the provisions of MCC
39.6900.
 (S) Wildlife Habitat Conservation and
Management Plan. Authorization of a single-
family residential dwelling in conjunction with a
Wildlife Habitat Conservation and Management
Plan is prohibited.
 (T)  On-site filming and activities accessory
to on-site filming if the activity would involve
no more than 45 days on any site within any
one-year period or does not involve erection of
sets that would remain in place for longer than
any 45-day period. On-site filming and activities
accessory to on-site filming may be considered
to include office administrative functions such
as payroll and scheduling, and the use of
campers, truck trailers or similar temporary
facilities.
 Temporary facilities may be used as
temporary housing for security personnel.
 "On-site filming and activities accessory to
on-site filming" includes: filming and site
preparation, construction of sets, staging,
makeup and support services customarily
provided for on-site filming and production of
advertisements, documentaries, feature film,
television services and other film productions
that rely on the rural qualities of an exclusive
farm use zone in more than an incidental way.
On-site filming and activities accessory to on-
site filming" does not include: facilities for
4-34 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
marketing, editing and other such activities that
are allowed only as a home occupation or
construction of new structures that requires a
building permit.
 (U) A site for the takeoff and landing of
model aircraft, including such buildings or
facilities as may reasonably be necessary.
Buildings or facilities shall not be more than 500
square feet in floor area or placed on a
permanent foundation unless the building or
facility pre-existed the use approved under this
paragraph. An owner of property used for the
purpose authorized in this paragraph may charge
a person operating the use on the property rent
for the property. An operator may charge users
of the property a fee that does not exceed the
operator’s cost to maintain the property,
buildings and facilities. The site shall not
include an aggregate surface or hard surface area
unless the surface pre-existed the use approved
under this paragraph. As used in this paragraph,
“model aircraft” means a small-scale version of
an airplane, glider, helicopter, dirigible or
balloon that is used or intended to be used for
flight and is controlled by radio, lines or design
by a person on the ground.
 (V) Fire service facilities providing
primarily rural fire protection services subject to
satisfying the requirements of MCC 39.6500
through 39.6600 (off-street parking), MCC
39.7525(A) (minimum yards), MCC 39.8000
through 39.8050 (design review), and MCC
39.6745 (signs).
 (W) Irrigation reservoirs, canals, delivery
lines and those structures and accessory
operational facilities, not including parks or
other recreational structures and facilities
associated with a district as defined in ORS
540.505.
 (X) Utility facility service lines. Utility
facility service lines are utility lines and
accessory facilities or structures that end at the
point where the utility service is received by the
customer and that are located on one or more of
the following:
(1) A public right of way;
(2) Land immediately adjacent to a
public right of way, provided the written
consent of all adjacent property owners
has been obtained; or
(3) The property to be served by the
utility.
 (Y) Land application of reclaimed water,
agricultural or industrial process water or
biosolids or the onsite treatment of septage prior
to the land application of biosolids, for
agricultural, horticultural or silvicultural
production, or for irrigation in connection with a
use allowed in the Exclusive Farm Use zone.
Subject to the issuance of a license, permit or
other approval by the Department of
Environmental Quality under ORS 454.695,
459.205, 468B.050, 468B.053 or 468B.055, or
in compliance with rules adopted under ORS
468B.095, and as provided in ORS 215.246 to
215.251.  For the purposes of this paragraph,
onsite treatment of septage prior to the land
application of biosolids is limited to treatment
using treatment facilities that are portable,
temporary and transportable by truck trailer, as
defined in ORS 801.580, during a period of time
within which land application of biosolids is
authorized under the license, permit or other
approval.
 (Z) Signs, as provided in this Chapter.
 (AA) Solar, photovoltaic and wind turbine
alternative energy production facilities accessory
to uses permitted in the base zone, provided that:
(1) All systems shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The system is an accessory
alternative energy system as defined
in MCC 39.2000;
(b) The system meets all overlay
requirements;
(c) The system is mounted to a
ground mount, to the roof of the
dwelling or accessory structure, or
to a wind tower;
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-35
(S-1 2023)
(2)  The overall height of solar energy
systems shall not exceed the peak of the
roof of the building on which the system
is mounted;
(3)  Wind Turbine Systems:
(a) Wind turbine systems shall be
set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the
combined height of the turbine
tower and blade length. Height is
measured from grade to the top of
the wind generator blade when it is
at its highest point;
(b) No lighting on wind turbine
towers is allowed except as required
by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or
state agency.
(c) The land owner signs and
records a covenant stating they are
responsible for the removal of the
system if it is abandoned. In the case
of a sale or transfer of property, the
new property owner shall be
responsible for the use and/or
removal of the system. Systems
unused for one consecutive year are
considered abandoned.
 (BB) In the West of Sandy River Rural
Planning Area and the East of Sandy River
Rural Planning Area only, a single, one-day
agri-tourism event subject to MCC 39.8925.
 (CC) A facility for the processing of farm
products as described in ORS 215.255.
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4225 REVIEW USES.
 (A) Utility facilities necessary for public
service, including wetland waste treatment
systems but not including commercial facilities
for the purpose of generating power for public
use by sale or transmission towers over 200 feet
in height provided:
(1) Radio and television towers 200 feet
and under when found to satisfy the
requirements of ORS 215.275 “Utility
facilities necessary for public service;
criteria; mitigating impact of facility”
and MCC 39.7550 through 39.7575.
(2) Wireless communications facilities
200 feet and under when found to satisfy
the requirements of MCC 39.7700
through 39.7765.
(3) All other utility facilities and/or
transmission towers 200 feet and under
in height subject to the following:
(a) The facility satisfies the
requirements of ORS 215.275,
“Utility facilities necessary for
public service; criteria; mitigating
impact of facility”; and
(b) The facility satisfies the
requirements of MCC 39.6500
through 39.6600; 39.7525(A);
39.8000 through 39.8050; and
39.6745.
 (B) A farm help dwelling for a relative on
real property used for farm use subject to the
standards in MCC 39.4265 (A).
 (C) A dwelling, including a mobile or
modular home, customarily provided in
conjunction with a farm use subject to the
standards in MCC 39.4265 (B).
 (D) Accessory farm dwellings, which
includes all types of residential structures
allowed by the applicable state building code,
customarily provided in conjunction with farm
use subject to all of the standards in MCC
39.4265 (C).
 (E) Notwithstanding the same ownership
grouping requirements of the Lot of Record Part,
a single family heritage tract dwelling may be
allowed on land not identified as high-value
farmland subject to the standards in MCC
39.4265 (D).
 (F) A Farm Stands subject to MCC 39.8870
through MCC 39.8885.
4-36 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (G) A winery, as described and regulated in
ORS 215.452, and subject to MCC 39.8900 –
39.8920, including uses and activities listed in
MCC.8915.
 (H) Off-street parking and loading pursuant
to MCC 39.6500 through 39.6600.
 (I) Lot Line Adjustment pursuant to the
provisions of MCC 39.4255.
 (J) Placement of Structures necessary for
continued public safety, or the protection of
essential public services or protection of private
or public existing structures, utility facilities,
roadways, driveways, accessory uses and
exterior improvements damaged during an
emergency/disaster event. This includes
replacement of temporary structures erected
during such events with permanent structures
performing an identical or related function. Land
use proposals for such structures shall be
submitted within 12 months following an
emergency/disaster event. Applicants are
responsible for all other applicable local, state
and federal permitting requirements.
 (K) A facility for the processing of farm
crops, or the production of biofuel as defined in
ORS 215, that is located on a farm operation that
provides at least one-quarter of the farm crops
processed at the facility. The building
established for the processing facility shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet of floor area exclusive
of the floor area designated for preparation,
storage or other farm use or devote more than
10,000 square feet to the processing activities
within another building supporting farm uses. A
processing facility shall comply with all
applicable siting standards but the standards
shall not be applied in a manner that prohibits
the siting of the processing facility. The siting
standards are the requirements of MCC 39.6500
through 39.6600 (off-street parking), MCC
39.4245(C), (D) & (E) (yards), and MCC
39.6745 (signs).
 (L) Parking of no more than seven log trucks
shall be allowed in an exclusive farm use zone
notwithstanding any other provision of law
except for health and safety provisions, unless
the log truck parking will:
(1) Force a significant change in
accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm or
forest use; or
(2) Significantly increase the cost of
accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm or
forest use.
 (M) In the West of Sandy River Rural Plan
Area a State or regional trail for which a master
plan that is consistent with OAR Division 34
State and Local Park Planning has been adopted
into the comprehensive plan. Development of
the trail and accessory facilities shall be subject
to the provisions for Design Review in MCC
39.8000 through 39.8050, and any other
applicable zoning code requirements; and
(1) Accessory facilities including but not
limited to parking areas, may only be
allowed in the EFU zone if there is no
alternative location in another zone and;
(2) Accessory facilities which must be
located in the EFU zone, shall be of a
size and scale that is consistent with the
rural character of the area.
 (N) Consolidation of Parcels and Lots
pursuant to MCC 39.9200.
 (O) Structures or uses customarily accessory
or incidental to any use permitted or approved in
this base zone, which do not meet the “accessory
structures” standard in MCC 39.4220, Allowed
Uses, but which meet the following provisions:
(1) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental unit, sleeping
quarters or any other residential unit.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a bathing tub.
(3) Any toilet or bathing facilities, such
as a shower, shall be located on the
ground floor of any multi-story building.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-37
(S-1 2023)
(4) An Accessory Structure containing a
toilet or bathing facilities shall not
contain Cooking Facilities.
(5) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item designed
to aid in sleep as a primary purpose,
unless such item is disassembled for
storage.
(6) The applicant must show that
building features or combined building
footprints exceeding the Allowed Use
provisions are the minimum possible
departure from the Allowed Use
standards to accommodate the use.
(7) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
 (P) Existing schools may be enhanced
subject to the requirements for Design Review in
MCC  39.8000 – 39.8050, Off-street Parking in
MCC 39.6500 – 39.6600, and the applicable
provisions of MCC 39.4235. Enhancement
includes alteration of school facilities that do not
add enclosed structures that could increase the
design capacity of the school or that do not
extend school-related activities closer to the
boundary of the tract.
 (Q) A temporary dwelling for health
hardship pursuant to MCC 39.8700 and 39.4245.
 (R) A Type B home occupation when
approved pursuant to MCC 39.8850.
 (S) A large winery, as described and
regulated in ORS 215.453.
 (T) A winery may carry out up to 18 days of
agri-tourism or other commercial events in a
calendar year on the tract occupied by the
winery, subject to MCC 39.8920.
 (U) In the West of Sandy River Rural
Planning Area and the East of Sandy River
Rural Planning Area only, agri-tourism events
subject to MCC 39.8930.
 (V) Dog training classes or testing trials,
which may be conducted outdoors or in
preexisting farm buildings, when:
(1) The number of dogs participating in
training does not exceed 10 dogs per
training class and the number of training
classes to be held on-site does not
exceed six per day; and
(2) The number of dogs participating in
a testing trial does not exceed 60 and the
number of testing trials to be conducted
on-site is limited to four or fewer trials
per calendar year.
 (W) A cider business, as described in ORS
215.451.
 (X) A farm brewery, as described in ORS
215.449.
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4230 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted when
found by the approval authority to satisfy the
applicable provisions in MCC 39.7000 to
39.7035 and the criteria listed for the use:
 (A) Commercial activities that are in
conjunction with a farm use, except for facilities
for processing crops that meet the standards for
crop source, building size, and other applicable
siting standards pursuant to MCC 39.4225(K)
above. Uses under this provision shall be subject
to the approval criteria in MCC 39.7015(1)
through (7).
 (B) Operations conducted for:
(1) Mining and processing of
geothermal resources as defined by ORS
522.005 and oil and gas as defined by
ORS 520.005 not otherwise permitted
under this section; and
(2) Mining, crushing or stockpiling of
aggregate and other mineral and other
subsurface resources subject to ORS
215.298.
4-38 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (C) Public parks and playgrounds. A public
park may be established consistent with the
provisions of ORS 195.120 and MCC 39.4235.
 (D) Private parks, playgrounds, hunting and
fishing preserves, and campgrounds.
(1) Existing facilities wholly within an
EFU base zone may be maintained,
enhanced or expanded subject to the
applicable requirements of this Chapter.
(2) New facilities may be allowed, but
not on high-value farm lands.
(3) In addition to the approval standards
in MCC 39.7000 to 39.7035, a private
campground shall be subject to the
following:
(a) Except on a lot or parcel
contiguous to a lake or reservoir,
campgrounds within three miles of
an urban growth boundary shall
meet the provisions in MCC
39.4235.
(b) The campground shall be an area
devoted to overnight temporary use
for vacation, recreational or
emergency purposes, but not for
residential purposes.
(c) The campground is established
on a site or is contiguous to lands
with a park or other outdoor natural
amenity that is accessible for
recreational use by the occupants of
the campground.
(d) The campground shall be
designed and integrated into the
rural agricultural and forest
environment in a manner that
protects the natural amenities of the
site and provides buffers of existing
native trees and vegetation or other
natural features between campsites.
(e) Campsites may be occupied by a
tent, travel trailer, yurt or
recreational vehicle. Separate sewer,
water or electric service hook-ups
shall not be provided to individual
camp sites, except that electrical
service may be provided to yurts.
Overnight temporary use in the
same campground by a camper or
camper's vehicle shall not exceed a
total of 30 days during any
consecutive 6 month period.
(f) The campground shall not
include intensively developed
recreational uses such as swimming
pools, tennis courts, retail stores or
gas stations.
(g) A private campground may
provide yurts for overnight camping
provided:
1. No more than one-third or a
maximum of 10 campsites,
whichever is smaller, may
include a yurt.
2. The yurt shall be located on
the ground or on a wood floor
with no permanent foundation.
3. As used in this subsection,
“yurt” means a round, domed
shelter of cloth or canvas on a
collapsible frame with no
plumbing, sewage disposal
hook-up or internal cooking
appliance.
 (E) Community centers owned and operated
by a governmental agency or a nonprofit
organization and operated primarily by and for
residents of the local rural community. The use
shall meet the provisions in MCC 39.4235.
 (F) Type C home occupation as provided for
in MCC 39.7400 through 39.7410.
 (G) A facility for the primary processing of
forest products, provided that such facility and is
compatible with farm uses described in ORS
215.203 (2). Such a facility may be approved for
a one-year period which is renewable. These
facilities are intended to be only portable or
temporary in nature.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-39
(S-1 2023)
 The primary processing of a forest product,
as used in this section, means the use of a
portable chipper or stud mill or other similar
methods of initial treatment of a forest product
in order to enable its shipment to market.
 Forest products, as used in this section,
means timber grown upon a parcel of land or
contiguous land where the primary processing
facility is located.
 (H) Transmission towers over 200 feet in
height, except as follows:
(1) Radio and television towers if found
to satisfy the requirements of MCC
39.7550 through MCC 39.7575; and
(2) Wireless communications facilities
200 feet and over are not allowed.
 (I) Dog kennels. Existing facilities wholly
within an EFU base zone may be maintained,
enhanced or expanded, subject to other
requirements of law. New facilities may be
allowed only on non-high-value lands.
 (J) The propagation, cultivation,
maintenance and harvesting of aquatic species
that are not under the jurisdiction of the State
Fish and Wildlife Commission. In accordance
with ORS 215.283(2)(p), notice of all
applications shall be mailed to the State
Department of Agriculture at least 20 calendar
days prior to any initial hearing on the
application.
 (K) Public road and highway projects
including:
(1) Reconstruction or modification of
public roads and highways involving the
removal or displacement of buildings
but not resulting in the creation of new
land parcels. and;
(2) Improvement of public road and
highway related facilities, such as
maintenance yards, weigh stations and
rest areas, where additional property or
right of way is required but not resulting
in the creation of new land parcels.
 (L) Notwithstanding the same ownership
grouping requirements of the Lot of Record
section, a single family heritage tract dwelling
may be allowed on land identified as high-value
farmland when:
(Note: MCC 39.7015 Conditional Use Approval
Criteria does not apply)
(1) The lot or parcel meets the
requirements of MCC 39.4265 (D) (1)
through (8); and
(2) The lot or parcel cannot practicably
be managed for farm use by itself or in
conjunction with other land due to
extraordinary circumstances inherent in
the land or its physical setting that do
not apply generally to other land in the
vicinity. For the purposes of this section,
this criterion asks whether the subject
lot or parcel can be physically put to
farm use without undue hardship or
difficulty because of extraordinary
circumstances inherent in the land or its
physical setting. Neither size alone nor a
parcel's limited economic potential
demonstrate that a lot of parcel cannot
be practicably managed for farm use.
Examples of “extraordinary
circumstances inherent in the land or its
physical setting” include very steep
slopes, deep ravines, rivers, streams,
roads, railroad or utility lines or other
similar natural or physical barriers that
by themselves or in combination
separate the subject lot or parcel from
adjacent agricultural land and prevent it
from being practicably managed for
farm use by itself or together with
adjacent or nearby farms. A lot or parcel
that has been put to farm use despite the
proximity of a natural barrier or since
the placement of a physical barrier shall
be presumed manageable for farm use;
and
4-40 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(3) The dwelling will not:
(a) Force a significant change in
accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm
or forest; or
(b) Significantly increase the cost of
accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm
or forest use; and
(4) The dwelling will not materially
alter the stability of the overall land use
pattern of the area.
 (M) Notwithstanding the same ownership
grouping requirements of the Lot of Record
section, a single family heritage tract dwelling
may be allowed on land identified as high-value
farmland when:
(Note: MCC 39.7015 Conditional Use Approval
Criteria does not apply)
(1) The lot or parcel meets the
requirements of MCC 39.4235(D) (1)
through (8); and
(2) The tract on which the dwelling will
be sited is:
(a) Not composed predominately of
irrigated or non-irrigated soils
classified prime, unique, Class I or
Class II; and
(b) Less that twenty-one acres in
size; and
(c) Is bordered on at least 67% of its
perimeter by tracts that are smaller
than 21 acres, and at least two such
tracts had dwellings on January 1,
1993; or
(d) Is not a flag lot and the tract is
bordered on at least 25% of its
perimeter by tracts that are smaller
than 21 acres, and at least four
dwellings existed on January 1,
1993, within one-quarter mile of the
center of the subject tract. Up to two
of the four dwellings may lie within
an urban growth boundary, but only
if the subject tract abuts an urban
growth boundary, or
(e) The tract is a flag lot and is
bordered on at least 25 percent of its
perimeter by tracts that are smaller
than 21 acres, and at least four
dwellings existed on January 1,
1993, within one-quarter mile of the
center of the subject tract and on the
same side of the public road that
provides access to the subject tract.
For purposes of this section, the
center of the subject tract is the
geographic center of the flag lot if
the applicant makes a written
request for that interpretation and
that interpretation does not cause the
center to be located outside the flag
lot. Up to two of the four dwellings
may lie within an urban growth
boundary, but only if the subject
tract abuts an urban growth
boundary. As used in this
subsection:
1. “Flag lot” means a tract
containing a narrow strip or
panhandle of land providing
access from the public road to
the rest of the tract; and
2. “Geographic center of the
flag lot” means the point of
intersection of two
perpendicular lines of which the
first line crosses the midpoint of
the longest side of a flag lot, at a
90-degree angle to the side, and
the second line crosses the
midpoint of the longest adjacent
side of the flag lot.
 (N) Construction of additional passing and
travel lanes requiring the acquisition of right of
way but not resulting in the creation of new land
parcels.
 (O) Park and ride lots.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-41
(S-1 2023)
 (P) Realignment of roads, subject to the
following limitations and the approval criteria in
MCC 39.7015 and MCC 39.7020:
(1) “Realignment” means rebuilding an
existing roadway on a new alignment
where the new centerline shifts outside
the existing right of way, and where the
existing road surface is either removed,
maintained as an access road or
maintained as a connection between the
realigned roadway and a road that
intersects the original alignment.
(2) The realignment shall maintain the
function of the existing road segment
being realigned as specified in the
acknowledged comprehensive plan.
 (Q) New access roads and collectors where
the function of the road is to reduce local access
to or local traffic on a state highway, subject to
the following limitations and the approval
criteria in MCC 39.7015 and MCC 39.7020:
(1) The roads shall be limited to two
travel lanes.
(2) Private access and intersections shall
be limited to rural needs or to provide
adequate emergency access.
 (R) Transportation facilities, services and
improvements that serve local travel needs, and
which:
(1) Are not otherwise listed as a use in
this EFU base zone or in OAR 660-012-
0065 “Transportation Improvements on
Rural Lands;” and
(2) Satisfy the approval criteria in MCC
39.7015 and MCC 39.7020:
 (S) Rural schools as provided in this
subsection. “Rural schools” means public or
private schools for kindergarten through grade
12, including all buildings essential to the
operation of a school, primarily for residents of
the rural area in which the school is located.
Establishment and expansion of rural schools
shall meet the requirements for approval of
Community Service Uses in MCC 39.7500 –
39.7525 in lieu of the Conditional Use
Provisions of MCC 39.7030 – 39.7035 and, if
located within three miles of an urban growth
boundary, the additional requirements set forth
in MCC 39.4235.
(1) New rural schools may be
established and existing rural schools
may be expanded on land not identified
as high-value farmland.
(2) Existing rural schools located on
high-value farmland wholly within the
EFU base zone may be expanded on the
same tract.
 (T) Notwithstanding the authority in MCC
39.8300 – 39.8315 to expand a nonconforming
use, but in addition and not in lieu of the
authority therein to continue, alter, restore or
replace a nonconforming use, a public or private
school, including all buildings essential to the
operation of the school, formerly allowed
pursuant to ORS 215.283(1)(a), as in effect
before January 1, 2010, and are not rural schools
as defined in MCC 39.4230 (S) may be
expanded only if:
(1) The expansion meets the
requirements for approval of
Community Service Uses in MCC
39.7500 – 39.7525 in lieu of the
Conditional Use Provisions of MCC
39.7030 – 39.7035;
(2) The expansion complies with ORS
215.296;
(3) The school was established on or
before January 1, 2009;
(4) The expansion occurs on a tax lot:
(a) On which the school was
established; or
(b) Contiguous to and, on January 1,
2015, under the same ownership as
the tax lot on which the school was
established.
4-42 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(5) The school is a public or private
school for kindergarten through grade
12.
(6) A school expansion under this
section cannot be denied upon any rule
or condition establishing:
(a) A maximum capacity of people
in the structure or group of
structures;
(b) A minimum distance between
structures; or
(c) A maximum density of
structures per acre.
 (U) A commercial photovoltaic solar power
generation facility may be allowed when:
(1) All lots and parcels involved in the
tract are Lots of Record pursuant to
MCC 39.3070.
(2) A photovoltaic solar power
generation facility shall not preclude
more than 12 acres from use as a
commercial agricultural enterprise.
 For purposes of applying the acreage
standards above, a photovoltaic solar power
generation facility includes all existing and
proposed facilities on a single tract, as well as
any existing and proposed facilities determined
to be under common ownership, on lands with
less than 1320-feet of separation from the tract
on which the new facility is proposed to be sited.
Projects connected to the same parent company
or individuals shall be considered to be in
common ownership regardless of the operating
business structure.
(3) Will not force a significant change in
accepted farm or forest practices or
surrounding lands devoted to farm or
forest use; and
(4) Will not significantly increase the
cost of accepted farm or forest practices
on surrounding lands devoted to farm or
forest use.
(5) The proposed photovoltaic solar
power generation facility will not create
unnecessary negative impacts on
agricultural operations conducted on any
portion of the subject tract not occupied
by project components.
(6) The presence of a photovoltaic solar
power generation facility will not result
in unnecessary soil erosion or loss that
could limit agricultural productivity on
the subject property.
(7) Construction or maintenance
activities will not result in unnecessary
soil compaction that reduces the
productivity of soil for crop production.
(8) Construction or maintenance
activities will not result in the unabated
introduction or spread of noxious weeds
and other undesirable weeds species.
(9) The project is not located on high-
value farmland soils unless it can be
demonstrated that:
(a) Non high-value farmland soils
are not available on the subject tract;
(b) Siting the project on non-high-
value farmland soils present on the
subject tract would significantly
reduce the projects ability to operate
successfully; or
(c) The proposed site is better suited
to allow continuation of an existing
commercial farm or ranching
operation on the subject tract than
other possible sites also located on
the subject tract, including those
comprised of non-high-value
farmland soils; and
(10) A study area consisting of lands
zoned for exclusive farm use located
within one mile measured from the
center of the proposed project shall be
established and:
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-43
(S-1 2023)
(a) If fewer than 48-acres of
photovoltaic solar power generation
facilities have been constructed or
received land use approvals and
obtained building permits within the
study area no further action is
necessary.
(b) When at least 48-acres of
photovoltaic solar power generation
have been constructed or received
land use approvals and obtained
building permits, either as a single
project or as multiple facilities,
within the study area the approval
authority must find that the
photovoltaic solar energy generation
facility will not materially alter the
stability of the overall land use
pattern of the area.  The stability of
the land use pattern will be
materially altered if the overall
effect of existing and potential
photo-voltaic solar energy
generation facilities will make it
more difficult for the existing farms
and ranches in the area to continue
operation due to diminished
opportunities to expand, purchase or
lease farmland, acquire water rights
or diminish the number of tracts or
acreage in farm use in a manner that
will destabilize the overall character
of the study area.
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4235 LIMITATIONS TO THE
DESIGN CAPACITY OF
STRUCTURES.
 (A) No enclosed structure with a design
capacity greater than 100 people, or group of
structures with a total design capacity of greater
than 100 people, shall be approved in connection
with the use within three miles of an urban
growth boundary, unless an exception is
approved pursuant to ORS 197.732 and OAR
chapter 660, division 4, or unless the structure is
described in a master plan adopted under the
provisions of OAR chapter 660, division 34.
 (B) Any enclosed structure or group of
enclosed structures described in subsection (A)
within a tract that existed on November 12, 2011
(effective date of Ord. 1186) must be separated
from other enclosed structures by at least one-
half mile.
 (C) Existing facilities wholly within a farm
use zone may be maintained, enhanced or
expanded on the same tract, subject to other
requirements of law, but enclosed existing
structures within a farm use zone within three
miles of an urban growth boundary may not be
expanded beyond the requirements of this
section.
§ 39.4240 SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS
CONDITION OF APPROVAL -
PROHIBITION ON CLAIMS
ALLEGING INJURY FROM
FARM OR FOREST
PRACTICES.
As a condition of approval of a single family
dwelling, the landowner for the dwelling shall
sign and record in the deed records for the
county a document binding the landowner, and
the landowner's successors in interest,
prohibiting them from pursuing a claim for relief
or cause of action alleging injury from farming
or forest practices for which no action or claim
is allowed under ORS 30.936 or 30.937.
§ 39.4245 DIMENSIONAL
REQUIREMENTS AND
DEVELOPMENT
STANDARDS.
 (A) Except as provided in MCC 39.3070,
the minimum lot size for new parcels shall be 80
acres in the EFU base zone.
 (B) That portion of a street which would
accrue to an adjacent lot if the street were
vacated shall be included in calculating the size
of such lot.
4-44 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (C) Minimum Yard Dimensions – Feet
Front Side Street Side Rear
30 10 30 30

Maximum Structure Height – 35 feet

Minimum Front Lot Line Length – 50 feet.
(1) Notwithstanding the Minimum Yard
Dimensions, but subject to all other
applicable Code provisions, a fence or
retaining wall may be located in a Yard,
provided that a fence or retaining wall
over six feet in height shall be setback
from all Lot Lines a distance at least
equal to the height of such fence or
retaining wall.
(2) An Accessory Structure may
encroach up to 40 percent into any
required Yard subject to the following:
(a) The Yard being modified is not
contiguous to a road.
(b) The Accessory Structure does
not exceed five feet in height or
exceed a footprint of ten square feet,
and
(c) The applicant demonstrates the
proposal complies with the fire code
as administered by the applicable
fire service agency.
(3) A Variance is required for any
Accessory Structure that encroaches
more than 40 percent into any required
Yard.
 (D) The minimum yard requirement shall be
increased where the yard abuts a street having
insufficient right-of-way width to serve the area.
The county Road Official shall determine the
necessary right-of-way widths based upon the
county “Design and Construction Manual” and
the Planning Director shall determine any
additional yard requirements in consultation
with the Road Official.
 (E) Structures such as barns, silos,
windmills, antennae, chimneys or similar
structures may exceed the height requirement if
located at least 30 feet from any property line.
 (F) On-site sewage disposal, storm
water/drainage control, water systems unless
these services are provided by public or
community source, shall be provided on the Lot
of Record.
(1) Sewage and stormwater disposal
systems for existing development may
be off-site in easement areas reserved
for that purpose.
(2) Stormwater/drainage control systems
are required for new impervious
surfaces. The system shall be adequate
to ensure that the rate of runoff from the
lot for the 10 year 24-hour storm event
is no greater than that before the
development.
 (G) Agricultural structures and equine
facilities such as barns, stables, silos, farm
equipment sheds, greenhouses or similar
structures that do not exceed the maximum
height requirement may have a reduced
minimum rear yard of less than 30 feet, to a
minimum of 10 feet, if:
(1) The structure is located at least 60
feet from any existing dwelling, other
than the dwelling(s) on the same tract,
where the rear property line is also the
rear property line of the adjacent tract, or

 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-45
(S-1 2023)
(2) The structure is located at least 40
feet from any existing dwelling, other
than the dwelling(s) on the same tract,
where the rear property line is also the
side property line of the adjacent tract.

(3) Placement of an agricultural related
structure under these provisions in (F)
do not change the minimum yard
requirements for future dwellings on
adjacent property.
 (H) All exterior lighting shall comply with
MCC 39.6850.
§ 39.4250 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE
FOR SPECIFIC USES.
 (A) Lots less than the minimum lot size
specified in MCC 39.4245 (A) may be created
for uses listed in MCC 39.4220(V), MCC
39.4225(A), MCC 39.4230(C) and (E) based
upon:
(1) The parcel for the nonfarm use is not
larger than the minimum size necessary
for the use;
(2) The nature of the proposed use in
relation to its impact on nearby
properties; and
(3) Consideration of the purposes of this
base zone.
(4) Land that is divided under this
section may not later be rezoned for
retail, commercial, industrial or other
nonresource use, except as provided
under the statewide land use planning
goals or under ORS 197.732.
 (B) Except as otherwise provided by MCC
39.3070, no sale or conveyance of any portion of
a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave
a structure on the remainder of the lot with less
than the minimum lot or yard requirements or
result in a lot with less than the area or width
requirements of this base zone.
 (C) A land division to create one new parcel
for the purpose of purchasing one of the
resulting parcels as provided in this section and
to manage the new parcel as public park land or
conservation land may be approved provided:
(1) The land division is for the purpose
of allowing a provider of public parks or
open space, or a not-for-profit land
conservation organization, to purchase
at least one of the resulting parcels; and
(2) A parcel created by the land division
that contains a dwelling is large enough
to support continued residential use of
the parcel.
(3) A parcel created pursuant to this
subsection that does not contain a
dwelling:
(a) Is not eligible for siting a
dwelling except as may be
authorized under ORS 195.120;
(b) May not be considered in
approving or denying an application
for siting any other dwelling;
(c) May not be considered in
approving a redesignation or
rezoning of forestlands except for a
redesignation or rezoning to allow a
public park, open space or other
natural resource use; and

4-46 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(d) A parcel created and purchased
by the provider of public parks or
open space or to a not-for-profit
land conservation organization may
not be smaller than 25 acres unless
the purpose of the land division is:
(i) To facilitate the creation of a
wildlife or pedestrian corridor
or the implementation of a
wildlife habitat protection plan;
or
(ii) To allow a transaction in
which at least one party is a
public park or open space
provider, or a not-for-profit land
conservation organization that
has cumulative ownership of at
least 2,000 acres of open space
or park property.
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4255 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT;
PROPERTY LINE
ADJUSTMENT.
 (A) Pursuant to the applicable provisions in
MCC 39.9300, an adjustment of the common lot
line between contiguous Lots of Record may be
authorized based on a finding that:
(1) All dwellings that were situated on
the same lot prior to the adjustments
must remain together on the
reconfigured lot; and
(2) The following dimensional and
access requirements are met:
(a) The relocated common property
line is in compliance with all
minimum yard and minimum front
lot line length requirements; and
(b) If the properties abut a street, the
required access requirements of
MCC 39.4260 are met after the
relocation of the common property
line; and
(3) The reconfigured lot areas will each:
(a) Be a minimum of 80 acres, or
(b) If one or both parcels is
currently less than 80 acres neither
parcel will be reduced to less than 2
acres after the adjustment; and
(c) The adjustment will not separate
a temporary hardship dwelling,
relative farm help dwelling, home
occupation or processing facility
from the parcel on which the
primary residential or other primary
use exists.
 (4) A property line adjustment may not
be used to:
(a) Decrease the size of a lawfully
established unit of land that, before
the relocation or elimination of the
common property line, is smaller
than 80 acres and contains an
existing dwelling or is approved for
the construction of a dwelling, if
another lawfully established unit of
land affected by the property line
adjustment would be increased to a
size as large as or larger than the
minimum lot or parcel size required
to qualify the other affected lawfully
established unit of land for a
dwelling;
(b) Decrease the size of a lawfully
established unit of land that contains
an existing dwelling or is approved
for construction of a dwelling to a
size smaller than 80 acres, if another
lawfully established unit of land
affected by the property line
adjustment would be increased to a
size as large as or larger than the
minimum lot or parcel size required
to qualify the other affected lawfully
established unit of land for a
dwelling.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-47
(S-1 2023)
(c) Allow an area of land used to
qualify a lawfully established unit of
land for a dwelling based on an
acreage standard to be used to qualify
another lawfully established unit of
land for a dwelling if the land use
approval would be based on an
acreage standard; or
(d) Adjust a property line that
resulted from a subdivision or
partition authorized by a waiver (as
that term is defined in ORS 195.300)
so that any lawfully established unit
of land affected by the property line
adjustment is larger than:
(i) Two acres if the lawfully
established unit of land is, before
the adjustment, two acres in size
or smaller and is high-value
farmland, high-value forestland
or within a ground water
restricted area (as those terms are
defined in ORS 195.300); or
(ii) Five acres if the lawfully
established unit of land is, before
the adjustment, five acres in size
or smaller and is not high-value
farmland, high-value forestland
or within a ground water
restricted area (as those terms are
defined in ORS 195.300).
(Ord. 1318, Amended, 11/30/2023)

§ 39.4260 ACCESS.
All lots and parcels in this base zone shall abut a
public street or shall have other access
determined by the approval authority to be safe
and convenient for pedestrians and for passenger
and emergency vehicles. This access
requirement does not apply to a pre-existing lot
and parcel that constitutes a Lot of Record
described in MCC 39.3070(C).
§ 39.4265 STANDARDS FOR
SPECIFIED FARM
DWELLINGS.
 (A) Farm Help Dwelling: A farm help
dwelling for a relative on real property used for
farm use as provided in MCC 39.4225(B) is not
allowed unless the dwelling is:
(1) Located on the same lot or parcel as
the dwelling of the farm operator; and is
(2) Occupied by a relative of the farm
operator or the farm operator's spouse, if
the farm operator does or will require
the assistance of the relative in the
management of the farm use. Qualifying
relatives include, spouses, child, parent,
sibling, sibling in-law, child in-law,
parent-in-law, sibling of a parent, child
of a sibling, stepparent, stepchild,
grandparent or grandchild of the owner
or a business entity owned by any one or
combination of these family members.
(3) Notwithstanding ORS 92.010 to
92.190 or the minimum lot size
requirements of MCC 39.4245, if the
owner of a dwelling described in this
subsection obtains construction
financing or other financing secured by
the dwelling and the secured party
forecloses on the dwelling, the secured
party may also foreclose on the home
site, as defined in ORS 308A.250, and
the foreclosure shall operate as a
partition of the home site to create a new
parcel, pursuant to OAR 660-033-
0130(9)(b)&(c). However, pursuant to
MCC 39.3070(D), the area of land with
the home site created by the foreclosure
shall not be deemed a Lot of Record,
and shall be subject to all restrictions on
development associated with that
designation.
4-48 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (B) Customary Farm Dwelling: A
dwelling, including a mobile or modular home,
customarily provided in conjunction with a farm
use as provided in MCC 39.4225(C) is not
allowed unless the following standards are met:
(1) High-value farmland soils, $80,000
income. On lands identified as high-
value farmland, a dwelling may be
considered customarily provided in
conjunction with farm use if:
(a) The subject tract is currently
employed for the farm use, as
defined in ORS 215.203, that
produced at least $80,000 in gross
annual income from the sale of farm
products in the last two years or
three of the last five years, or the
average farm income earned on the
tract in the best three of the last five
years; and
(b) Except as permitted in ORS
215.283 (1) (p) (1999 Edition) (i.e.
seasonal farmworker housing), there
is no other dwelling on land
designated for exclusive farm use
that is owned by the farm or ranch
operator, or that is on the farm or
ranch operation. “Farm or ranch
operation” shall mean all lots or
parcels of land owned by the farm
or ranch operator that are used by
the farm or ranch operator for farm
use as defined in ORS 215.203; and
(c) The dwelling will be occupied
by a person or persons who
produced the commodities which
grossed the income in subsection (a)
of this subsection; and
(d) In determining the gross income
required by subsection (a) of this
subsection:
1. The cost of purchased
livestock shall be deducted from
the total gross income attributed
to the farm or ranch operation;
2. Only gross income from land
owned, not leased or rented,
shall be counted; and
3. Gross farm income earned
from a lot or parcel which has
been used previously to qualify
another lot or parcel for the
construction or siting of a
primary farm dwelling may not
be used; and
4. For the purposes of this
subsection, lots or parcels zoned
for farm use in Multnomah
County or contiguous counties
may be used to meet the gross
income requirements.
(e) Prior to the final approval for a
dwelling, the applicant shall provide
evidence that the covenants,
conditions and restrictions form
referred to as “Exhibit A” in OAR
660-033-0135(5)(b) has been
recorded with the county clerk of
the county or counties where the
property subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions is
located. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall be recorded for
each lot or parcel subject to the
application for the primary farm
dwelling.
1. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall preclude
all future rights to construct a
dwelling except for accessory
farm dwellings, relative farm
help dwellings, temporary
hardship dwellings or
replacement dwellings allowed
by ORS Chapter 215.
2. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall preclude
the use of any gross farm
income earned on the lots or
parcels to qualify another lot or
parcel for a primary farm
dwelling.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-49
(S-1 2023)
3. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions are irrevocable,
unless a statement of release is
signed by an authorized
representative of the county or
counties where the property
subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions is
located.
4. Enforcement of the
covenants, conditions and
restrictions may be undertaken
by the Department of Land
Conservation and Development
or by the county or counties
where the property subject to
the covenants, conditions and
restrictions is located.
5. The failure to follow the
requirements of this section
shall not affect the validity of
the transfer of property or the
legal remedies available to the
buyers of property which is
subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions
required by this section.
6. The Planning Director shall
maintain a copy of the
covenants, conditions and
restrictions that have been filed
in the county deed records
pursuant to this subsection and a
map or other record depicting
the lots and parcels subject to
the covenants, conditions and
restrictions. The map or other
record required by this
subsection shall be readily
available to the public in the
county planning office.
(2) Not high-value farmland soils, 160
acres. On land not identified as high-
value farmland a dwelling may be
considered customarily provided in
conjunction with farm use if:
(a) The parcel on which the
dwelling will be located is at least
160 acres; and
(b) The subject tract is currently
employed for farm use, as defined in
ORS 215.203; and
(c) The dwelling will be occupied
by a person or persons who will be
principally engaged in the farm use
of the land, such as planting,
harvesting, marketing or caring for
livestock, at a commercial scale; and
(d) Except as permitted in ORS
215.283 (1) (p) (1999 Edition) (i.e.
seasonal farm worker housing),
there is no other dwelling on the
subject tract.
(3) Not high-value farmland soils, $40,000
income or mid-point of median income
range. On land not identified as high-value
farmland a dwelling may be considered
customarily provided in conjunction with
farm use if:
(a) The subject tract is currently
employed for the farm use, as
defined in ORS 215.203, that
produced in the last two years, three
of the last five years, or the average
farm income earned on the tract in
the best three of the last five years,
or the lower of the following:
1. At least $40,000 in gross
annual income from the sale of
farm products; or
2. Gross annual income of at
least the midpoint of the median
income range of gross annual
sales for farms in the county
with gross annual sales of
$10,000 or more according to
the 1992 Census of Agriculture,
Oregon; and
4-50 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(b) Except as permitted in ORS
215.283(1)(p) (1999 Edition) (i.e.
seasonal farmworker housing), there
is no other dwelling on lands
designated for exclusive farm use
pursuant to ORS 215 owned by the
farm or ranch operator or on the
farm or ranch operation. “Farm or
ranch operation” shall mean all lots
or parcels of land owned by the
farm or ranch operator that are used
by the farm or ranch operator for
farm use as defined in ORS
215.203; and
(c) The dwelling will be occupied
by a person or persons who
produced the commodities which
grossed the income in subsection (a)
of this subsection; and
(d) In determining the gross income
required by subsection (a) of this
subsection:
1. The cost of purchased
livestock shall be deducted from
the total gross income attributed
to the farm or ranch operation;
and
2. Only costs and sale prices of
livestock that are within a
reasonable range of prevailing
costs and sale prices in the
Oregon and Washington region
shall be counted in the
determination of gross income.
This may be done by comparing
actual sales documents to such
published livestock value
sources as made available by the
Oregon Agricultural Statistics
Services or the Oregon State
Extension Service; and
3. Only gross income from land
owned, not leased or rented,
shall be counted; and
4. Gross farm income earned
from a lot or parcel which has
been used previously to qualify
another lot or parcel for the
construction or siting of a
primary farm dwelling may not
be used; and
5. For the purposes of this
subsection, lots or parcels zoned
for farm use in Multnomah
County or contiguous counties
may be used to meet the gross
income requirements; and
(e) Prior to the final approval for a
dwelling, the applicant shall provide
evidence that the covenants,
conditions and restrictions form
referred to as “Exhibit A” in OAR
660-033-0135(5)(b) has been
recorded with the county clerk of
the county or counties where the
property subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions is
located. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall be recorded for
each lot or parcel subject to the
application for the primary farm
dwelling.
1. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall preclude
all future rights to construct a
dwelling except for accessory
farm dwellings, relative farm
help dwellings, temporary
hardship dwellings or
replacement dwellings allowed
by ORS Chapter 215.
2. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions shall preclude
the use of any gross farm
income earned on the lots or
parcels to qualify another lot or
parcel for a primary farm
dwelling.
3. The covenants, conditions
and restrictions are irrevocable,
unless a statement of release is
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-51
(S-1 2023)
signed by an authorized
representative of the county or
counties where the property
subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions is
located.
4. Enforcement of the
covenants, conditions and
restrictions may be undertaken
by the Oregon Department of
Land Conservation and
Development or by the county
or counties where the property
subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions is
located.
5. The failure to follow the
requirements of this section
shall not affect the validity of
the transfer of property or the
legal remedies available to the
buyers of property which is
subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions
required by this section.
6. The Planning Director shall
maintain a copy of the
covenants, conditions and
restrictions filed in the county
deed records pursuant to this
section and a map or other
record depicting the lots and
parcels subject to the covenants,
conditions and restrictions filed
in the county deed records
pursuant to this section. The
map or other record required by
this subsection shall be readily
available to the public in the
county planning office.
(4) Commercial dairy farm. A dwelling
may be considered customarily provided
in conjunction with a commercial dairy
farm if:
(a) The subject tract will be
employed as a commercial dairy
operation that owns a sufficient
number of producing dairy animals
capable of earning the following
from the sale of fluid milk:
1. On land not identified as high-
value farmland, at least $40,000
in gross annual income or the
gross annual income of at least
the midpoint of the median
income range of gross annual
sales for farms in Multnomah
County with gross annual sales
of $10,000 or more according to
the 1992 Census of Agriculture,
Oregon; or
2. On land identified as high-
value farmland, at least $80,000
in gross annual income; and (b)
The dwelling is sited on the same
lot or parcel as the buildings
required by the commercial
dairy; and
(c) Except as permitted by
215.283(1)(p) (1999 Edition)
(seasonal farmworker housing),
there is no other dwelling on the
subject tract; and
(d) The dwelling will be occupied
by a person or persons who will be
principally engaged in the operation
of the commercial dairy farm, such
as the feeding, milking or pasturing
of the dairy animals or other farm
use activities necessary to the
operation of the commercial dairy
farm; and
(e) The building permits, if required,
have been issued for and
construction has begun for the
buildings and animal waste facilities
required for a commercial dairy
farm; and
(f) The Oregon Department of
Agriculture has approved a permit
for a “confined animal feeding
operation” under ORS 468B.050
and 468B.200 to 468B.230 and has
4-52 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
approved a Producer License for the
sale of dairy products under ORS
621.072.
(g) “Commercial dairy farm” is a
dairy operation that owns a
sufficient number of producing
dairy animals capable of earning the
gross annual income required by
OAR 660-033-0135(3)(a) or (4)(a),
whichever is applicable, from the
sale of fluid milk.
(5) Move to a new farm. A dwelling
may be considered customarily provided
in conjunction with farm use if:
(a) Within the previous two years,
the applicant owned and operated a
farm or ranch operation that earned
the gross farm income in at least
three of the last five years, in each
of the last two years, or the average
farm income earned on the tract in
the best three of the last five years:
1. On land not identified as
high-value farmland, at least
$40,000 in gross annual income
from the sale of farm products;
or
2. On land not identified as
high-value farmland, the gross
annual income of at least the
midpoint of the median income
range of gross annual sales for
farms in Multnomah County
with gross annual sales of
$10,000 or more according to
the 1992 Census of Agriculture,
Oregon; or
3. On land identified as high-
value farmland, at least $80,000
in gross annual income from the
sale of farm products; and
(b) The subject lot or parcel on
which the dwelling will be located is
a minimum lot size of 80 acres and
is currently employed for the farm
use, as defined in ORS 215.203, that
produced in the last two years or
three of the last five years:
1. On land not identified as
high-value farmland, at least
$40,000 in gross annual income
from the sale of farm products;
or
2. On land not identified as
high-value farmland, the gross
annual income of at least the
midpoint of the median income
range of gross annual sales for
farms in Multnomah County
with gross annual sales of
$10,000 or more according to
the 1992 Census of Agriculture,
Oregon; or
3. On land identified as high-
value farmland, at least $80,000
in gross annual income from the
sale of farm products; and
(c) Except as permitted in ORS
215.283(1)(p) (1999 Edition)
(seasonal farmworker housing),
there is no other dwelling on the
subject tract; and
(d) The dwelling will be occupied
by a person or persons who
produced the commodities which
grossed the income in subsection (a)
of this subsection; and
(e) In determining the gross income
required by subsections (a) and (b)
of this subsection:
1. The cost of purchased
livestock shall be deducted from
the total gross income attributed
to the tract; and
2. Only gross income from land
owned, not leased or rented,
shall be counted.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-53
(S-1 2023)
 (C) Accessory farm dwellings, which
includes all types of residential structures
allowed by the applicable state building code,
customarily provided in conjunction with farm
use as provided in MCC 39.4225(D) are not
allowed unless each accessory farm dwelling
meets all of the following standards:
(1) The accessory farm dwelling will be
occupied by a person or persons who
will be principally engaged in the farm
use of the land and whose seasonal or
year-round assistance in the
management of the farm use, such as
planting, harvesting, marketing or caring
for livestock, is or will be required by
the farm operator; and
(2) The accessory farm dwelling shall be
located:
(a) On the same lot or parcel as the
primary farm dwelling; or
(b) On the same tract as the primary
farm dwelling when the lot or parcel
on which the accessory dwelling
will be sited is consolidated into a
single parcel with all other
contiguous lots and parcels in the
tract; or
(c) On a lot or parcel on which the
primary farm dwelling is not
located, when:
1. The accessory farm dwelling
is limited to only a
manufactured dwelling; and
2. A deed restriction is filed
with the county clerk. The deed
restriction shall require the
manufactured dwelling to be
removed when the lot or parcel
is conveyed to another party;
and
3. The manufactured dwelling
may remain if it is reapproved;
or
(d) On a lot or parcel on which the
primary farm dwelling is not
located, when the accessory farm
dwelling is limited to only attached
multi-unit residential structures
allowed by the applicable state
building code or similar types of
farm labor housing as such farm
labor housing may exist on the farm
or ranch operation that is registered
with the Department of Consumer
and Business Services, Oregon
Occupational Safety and Health
Division under ORS 658.750. All
accessory farm dwellings approved
under this subparagraph shall be
removed, demolished or converted
to a nonresidential use when farm
worker housing is no longer
required; or
(e) On a lot or parcel on which the
primary farm dwelling is not
located, when the accessory farm
dwelling is located on a lot or parcel
at least 80 acres in area and the lot
or parcel complies with the
applicable gross farm income
requirements in MCC 39.4265(C)(4)
below; and
(3) There is no other dwelling on the
lands designated for exclusive farm use
owned by the farm operator that is
vacant or currently occupied by persons
not working on the subject farm or ranch
and that could reasonably be used as an
accessory farm dwelling;
and
(4) In addition to the requirements in (1)
through (3) in this section, the primary
farm dwelling to which the proposed
dwelling would be accessory, meets one
of the following:
(a) On land not identified as high-
value farmland, the primary farm
dwelling is located on a farm or
ranch operation that is currently
employed for farm use, as defined in
4-54 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
ORS 215.203, and produced in the
last two years or three of the last
five years, or the average farm
income earned on the tract in the
best three of the last five years the
lower of the following:
1. At least $40,000 in gross
annual income from the sale of
farm products. In determining
the gross income, the cost of
purchased livestock shall be
deducted from the total gross
income attributed to the tract; or
2. Gross annual income of at
least the midpoint of the median
income range of gross annual
sales for farms in the county
with the gross annual sales of
$10,000 or more according to
the 1992 Census of Agriculture,
Oregon. In determining the
gross income, the cost of
purchased livestock shall be
deducted from the total gross
income attributed to the tract; or
(b) On land identified as high-value
farmland, the primary farm dwelling
is located on a farm or ranch
operation that is currently employed
for farm use, as defined in ORS
215.203, and produced at least
$80,000 in gross annual income
from the sale of farm products in the
last two years, or three of the last
five years or the average farm
income earned on the tract in the
best three of the last five years. In
determining the gross income, the
cost of purchased livestock shall be
deducted from the total gross
income attributed to the tract; or
(c) It is located on a commercial
dairy farm as defined by OAR 660-
033-0135(8); and
1. The building permits, if
required, have been issued and
construction has begun or been
completed for the buildings and
animal waste facilities required
for a commercial dairy farm;
and
2. The Oregon Department of
Agriculture has approved a
permit for a “confined animal
feeding operation” under ORS
468B.050 and ORS 468B.200 to
468B.230; and
3. A Producer License for the
sale of dairy products under
ORS 621.072 has been
obtained.
(5) The approval authority shall not
approve any proposed division of a lot
or parcel for an accessory farm dwelling
approved pursuant to this section. If it is
determined that an accessory farm
dwelling satisfies the requirements of
MCC 39.4265 (B), a parcel may be
created consistent with the minimum
parcel size requirements in MCC
39.4245.
 (D) Heritage Tract Dwelling:
Notwithstanding the same ownership grouping
requirements of the Lot of Record section, a
single family heritage tract dwelling may be
allowed on land not identified as high-value
farmland when:
(1) The lot or parcel on which the
dwelling will be sited meets the
following requirements:
(a) A deed or other instrument
creating the lot or parcel was
recorded with the Department of
General Services, or was in
recordable form prior to January 1,
1985; and
(b) The lot or parcel satisfies all
applicable laws when the lot or
parcel was created; and
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-55
(S-1 2023)
(c) The lot or parcel was acquired
and owned continuously by the
present owner:
1. Since prior to January 1,
1985; or
2. By devise or by intestate
succession from a person who
acquired and had owned
continuously the lot or parcel
since prior to January 1, 1985;
and
(2) The tract on which the dwelling will
be sited does not include a dwelling; and
(3) The proposed dwelling is not
prohibited by, and will comply with, the
requirements of the Comprehensive
Plan, land use regulations, and other
provisions of law; and
(4) The lot or parcel on which the
dwelling will be sited does not lie within
an area designated by the
Comprehensive Plan as a Big Game
habitat area; and
(5) The lot or parcel on which the
dwelling will be sited is part of a tract,
the remaining portions of the tract shall
be consolidated into a single parcel
when the dwelling is allowed; and
(6) The County Assessor shall be
notified when the permit is approved.
(7) Approval of the dwelling would not:
(a) Exceed the facilities and service
capabilities of the area; and
(b) Materially alter the stability of
the overall land use pattern of the
area; and
(c) Create conditions or
circumstances that are found to be
contrary to the purpose or intent of
the Comprehensive Plan or this
Chapter.
(8) For purposes of this subsection, and
of dwellings considered under MCC
39.4230 (L) and (M), the following
definitions apply:
(a) Owner includes the spouse,
child, parent, sibling, sibling in-law,
child in-law, parent-in-law, sibling
of a parent, child of a sibling,
stepparent, stepchild, grandparent or
grandchild of the owner or a
business entity owned by any one or
a combination of these family
members.
(b) Date of Creation and Existence.
When a lot, parcel or tract is
reconfigured pursuant to applicable
law after November 4, 1993, the
effect of which is to qualify a lot,
parcel or tract for the siting of a
dwelling, the date of the
reconfiguration is the date of
creation or existence. Reconfigured
means any change in the boundary
of the lot, parcel or tract.
Therefore, if the lot, parcel or tract does not
qualify for a dwelling under the Heritage Tract
Dwelling standards, any reconfiguration after
November 4, 1993 cannot in any way enable the
tract to meet the approval criteria for a new
dwelling.
(Ord. 1309, Amended, 08/18/2022; Ord. 1304, Amended,
01/20/2022; Ord. 1270, Amended, 03/14/2019)

4-56 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
4.B – NON-RESOURCE RESIDENTIAL
BASE ZONES (EXCEPTION LANDS)
4.B.1 – MULTIPLE USE AGRICULTURE
(MUA-20)
§
