39.4300- PURPOSE.
The purposes of the Multiple Use Agriculture
base zone are to conserve those agricultural
lands not suited to full-time commercial farming
for diversified or part-time agriculture uses; to
encourage the use of non-agricultural lands for
other purposes, such as forestry, outdoor
recreation, open space, low density residential
development and appropriate Conditional Uses,
when these uses are shown to be compatible
with the agricultural uses, natural resource base,
the character of the area and the applicable
County policies.
§ 39.4302 AREA AFFECTED.
MCC 39.4300 to 39.4345 shall apply to those
lands designated MUA-20 on the Multnomah
County Zoning Map.
§ 39.4305 USES.
No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, altered or enlarged in this base zone
except for the uses listed in MCC 39.4310
through 39.4320 when found to comply with
MCC 39.4325 through 39.4345 provided such
uses occur on a Lot of Record.
§ 39.4310 ALLOWED USES.
The following uses and their accessory uses are
allowed, subject to all applicable supplementary
regulations contained in MCC Chapter 39.
 (A) Residential use consisting of a single
family dwelling on a Lot of Record.
 (B) Farm uses, as defined in ORS 215.203
(2) (a) for the following purposes only:
(1) Raising and harvesting of crops;
(2) Raising of livestock and honeybees;
or,
(3) Any other agricultural or
horticultural purpose or animal
husbandry purpose or combination
thereof, except as provided in MCC
39.4320(B).
 (C) The propagation or harvesting of forest
products.
 (D) Public and private conservation areas
and structures for the protection of water, soil,
open space, forest and wildlife resources.
 (E) Type A home occupations pursuant to
MCC 39.8800.
 (F) Accessory Structures subject to the
following:
(1) The Accessory Structure is
customarily accessory or incidental to
any use permitted or approved in this
base zone and is a structure identified in
the following list:
(a) Garages or carports;
(b) Pump houses;
(c) Garden sheds;
(d) Workshops;
(e) Storage sheds, including
shipping containers used for storage
only;
(f) Greenhouses;
(g) Woodsheds;
(h) Shelter for pets, horses or
livestock and associated buildings
such as: manure storage, feed
storage, tack storage, and indoor
exercise area;
(i) Swimming pools, pool houses,
hot tubs, saunas, and associated
changing rooms;
(j) Sport courts;
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-57
(S-1 2023)
(k) Gazebos, pergolas, and detached
decks;
(l) Fences, gates, or gate support
structures; and
(m) Mechanical equipment such as
air conditioning units, heat pumps
and electrical boxes; and
(n) Similar structures.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental u nit,
sleeping quarters or any other residential
use.
(3) The Accessory Structure may
contain one sink.
(4) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain:
(a) More than one story;
(b) Cooking Facilities;
(c) A toilet;
(d) Bathing facilities such as a
shower or bathing tub;
(e) A mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item
designed to aid in sleep as a primary
purpose, unless such item is
disassembled for storage; or
(f) A closet built into a wall.
(5) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
(6) The combined footprints of all
buildings accessory to an accessory
dwelling unit (ADU) shall not exceed
combined footprints of 400 square feet
and the combined footprints of all
Accessory Buildings on a Lot of Record,
including buildings accessory to an
ADU, shall not exceed 2,500 square
feet.
(7) An Accessory Structure exceeding
any of the Allowed Use provisions
above, except for the combined
footprints allowed for all buildings
accessory to an ADU, shall be
considered through the Review Use
provisions.
(8) Buildings in conjunction with farm
uses as defined in ORS 215.203 are not
subject to these provisions. Such
buildings shall be used for their allowed
farm purposes only and, unless so
authorized, shall not be used, whether
temporarily or permanently, as a
primary dwelling, accessory dwelling
unit, apartment, guesthouse, housing
rental unit, sleeping quarters or any
other residential use.
 (G) Family Day Care.
 (H) Actions taken in response to an
emergency/disaster event as defined in MCC
39.2000 pursuant to the provisions of MCC
39.6900.
 (I) Signs, as provided in this Chapter.
 (J) Transportation facilities and
improvements that serve local needs or are part
of the adopted Multnomah County Functional
Classification of Trafficways plan, except that
transit stations and park and ride lots shall be
subject to the provisions of Community Service
Uses.
 (K) Solar, photovoltaic and wind turbine
alternative energy production facilities accessory
to uses permitted in the base zone, provided that:
(1) All systems shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The system is an accessory
alternative energy system as defined
in MCC 39.2000;
(b) The system meets all overlay
requirements;
4-58 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(c) The system is mounted to a
ground mount, to the roof of the
dwelling or accessory structure, or
to a wind tower;
(2)  The overall height of solar energy
systems shall not exceed the peak of the
roof of the building on which the system
is mounted;
(3)  Wind Turbine Systems:
(a) Wind turbine systems shall be
set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the
combined height of the turbine
tower and blade length. Height is
measured from grade to the top of
the wind generator blade when it is
at its highest point;
(b) No lighting on wind turbine
towers is allowed except as required
by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or
state agency.
(c) The land owner signs and
records a covenant stating they are
responsible for the removal of the
system if it is abandoned. In the case
of a sale or transfer of property, the
new property owner shall be
responsible for the use and/or
removal of the system. Systems
unused for one consecutive year are
considered abandoned.
 (L) Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU), subject
to the following standards:

(1) The ADU is sited entirely inside the
urban growth boundary.

(2) The ADU is not accessory to a health
hardship dwelling or any other type of
temporary dwelling.

(3) Transportation Impacts shall be
mitigated per Multnomah County R oad
Rules. The ADU shall use the same
lawfully established driveway entrance as
the single -family dwelling, although the
driveway may be extended to the ADU.
No variance, adjustment, deviation or any
other modification to this shared driveway
provision is allowed.

(4) The floor area of the ADU shall not
exceed either 800 square feet, or 75% of
the floor area of the single -family
dwelling to which the ADU is accessory,
whichever is less.

(5) The ADU shall either be:

(a) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
single-family dwelling;

(b) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
building that is accessory to a single -
family dwelling, provided that the
accessory building existed on the
effective date of this ordinance;

(c) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
building that is accessory to a single -
family dwelling, provided that the
accessory building is located at least 7
feet and no more than 20 feet from the
single family dwelling, measured at the
closest points between exterior walls of
both buildings.  Chimneys, eaves,
building and window trim are not
included in the measurement above.
No variance, adjustment, deviation or
any other modification to a ny of the
distances listed in  this provision are
allowed; or

(d) Detached, provided that the
detached ADU is located at least 7 feet
and no more than 20 feet fr om the
single family dwelling, measured at the
closest points between exterior walls of
both buildings.  Chimneys, eaves,
building and window trim are not
included in the measurement above.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-59
(S-1 2023)
No variance, adjustment, deviation or
any other modification to an y of the
distances listed in this provision are
allowed.

(6) An attached or interior ADU shall
include at least one separate exterior
doorway to the outside. Internal entrance(s)
to the attached building are allowed.

(7) The following designs are not permitted
for use as an ADU:  Recreational vehicle,
park model recreational vehicle, yurt or any
other similar design not intended for
permanent human occupancy or any
structure unable to meet all applicable
construction or installation standards.

(8) Short -term rental of the ADU is
prohibited.  For purposes of this subsection,
short-term rental is defined as fee -based
occupancy for a period less than 30
consecutive calendar days.  Month -to-
month rental agreements for long -term
purposes are not short-term rental.

(9) The land owner shall sign and record
with the county a covenant stating that the
ADU cannot be used for short -term rental,
as defined in this section.  The covenant
shall apply until such time the subject
property is annexed into a city and no
longer subject to county land use
regulations.

(M) In the East of Sandy River Rural
Planning Area only, a  single, one -day agri -
tourism event subject to MCC 39.8925.

§ 39.4315 REVIEW USES.
The following uses may be permitted when
found by the approval authority to satisfy the
applicable standards of this Chapter.
 (A) Temporary uses when approved
pursuant to MCC 39.8700 and 39.8750.
 (B) Wholesale or retail sales of farm or
forest products raised or grown on the premises
or of farm crops or livestock from other farm
operations located in Multnomah County or in
adjacent counties of Oregon or Washington
bordering on Multnomah County, subject to the
following condition:
 The location and design of any building,
stand or sign in conjunction with wholesale or
retail sales shall be subject to approval of the
Planning Director on a finding that the location
and design are compatible with the character of
the area.
 (C) Property Line Adjustment pursuant to
the provisions of MCC 39.4330.
 (D) Placement of structures necessary for
continued public safety, or the protection of
essential public services or protection of private
or public existing structures, utility facilities,
roadways, driveways, accessory uses and
exterior improvements damaged during an
emergency/disaster event. This includes
replacement of temporary structures erected
during such events with permanent structures
performing an identical or related function. Land
use proposals for such structures shall be
submitted within 12 months following an
emergency/disaster event. Applicants are
responsible for all other applicable local, state
and federal permitting requirements.
 (E) Lots of Exception pursuant to the
provisions of MCC 39.4330.
 (F) Wireless communication facilities that
employ concealment technology or co-location
as described in MCC 39.7710(B) pursuant to the
applicable approval criteria of MCC 39.7700
through 39.7765.
 (G) Consolidation of Parcels and Lots
pursuant to MCC 39.9200 and Replatting of
Partition and Subdivision Plats pursuant to MCC
39.9650.
 (H) Structures or uses customarily accessory
or incidental to any use permitted or approved in
this base zone, which do not meet the “accessory
structures” standard in MCC 39.4310 Allowed
Uses, but which meet the following provisions:
4-60 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(1) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental unit, sleeping
quarters or any other residential unit.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a bathing tub.
(3) Any toilet or bathing facilities, such
as a shower, shall be located on the
ground floor of any multi-story building.
(4) An Accessory Structure containing a
toilet or bathing facilities shall not
contain Cooking Facilities.
(5) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item designed
to aid in sleep as a primary purpose,
unless such item is disassembled for
storage.
(6) The applicant must show that
building features or combined building
footprints exceeding the Allowed Use
provisions are the minimum possible
departure from the Allowed Use
standards to accommodate the use.
(7) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
 (I) A Type B home occupation when
approved pursuant to MCC 39.8850.
 (J) In the West of Sandy River Rural Plan
Area, a State or regional trail for which a master
plan that is consistent with OAR Division 34
State and Local Park Planning has been adopted
into the comprehensive plan. Development of
the trail and accessory facilities shall be subject
to the provisions for Design Review in MCC
39.8000 through 39.8050, and any other
applicable zoning code requirements. Accessory
facilities shall be of a size and scale that is
consistent with the rural character of the area.
 (K) In the East of Sandy River Rural
Planning Area only, agri-tourism events subject
to MCC 39.8930.
§ 39.4320 CONDITIONAL USES.
The following uses may be permitted when
found by the approval authority to satisfy the
applicable standards of this Chapter:
 (A) Community Service Uses listed in MCC
39.7520 pursuant to the provisions of MCC
39.7500 through MCC 39.7810;
 (B) The following Conditional Uses
pursuant to the provisions of Part 7 of this
Chapter:
(1) Operations conducted for the mining
and processing of geothermal resources
as defined by ORS 522.005; or
exploration, mining and processing of
aggregate and other mineral or
subsurface resources;
(2) Commercial processing of
agricultural products primarily raised or
grown in the region;
(3) Raising any type of fowl or
processing the by-products thereof for
sale at wholesale or retail;
(4) Feed lots;
(5) Raising of four or more swine over
four months of age;
(6) Raising of fur bearing animals for
sale at wholesale or retail;
(7) Commercial dog kennels; and
(8) Commercial processing of forest
products primarily grown in the region.
 (C) The following Conditional Uses may be
permitted on lands not predominantly of
Agricultural Capability Class I, II, or III soils:
(1) Planned Development for single
family residences, as provided in MCC
39.5300 through MCC 39.5350 and the
applicable current “planned unit
development” standards within the
Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter
660, Division 004;
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-61
(S-1 2023)
(2) Except for in the West of Sandy
River Rural Plan Area, the following
uses pursuant to the provisions of MCC
39.7000 through 39.7020:
(a) Cottage industries,
(b) Limited rural service
commercial uses such as local
stores, shops, offices, repair services
and similar uses, and
(c) Tourist commercial uses such as
restaurants, gas stations, motels,
guest ranches and similar uses.
 (D) Type C home occupation as provided
for in MCC 39.7400 through 39.7410.
 (E) Large Fills as provided for in MCC
39.7200 through 39.7220.
§ 39.4325 DIMENSIONAL
REQUIREMENTS AND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All development proposed in this base zone shall
comply with the applicable provisions of this
section.
 (A) Except as provided in MCC 39.3080,
39.4330, 39.4335 and 39.5300 through 39.5350,
the minimum lot size for new parcels or lots
shall be 20 acres.
 (B) That portion of a street which would
accrue to an adjacent lot if the street were
vacated shall be included in calculating the area
of such lot.
 (C) Minimum Yard Dimensions – Feet
Front Side Street
Side
Rear
30 10 30 30

Maximum Structure Height – 35 feet
Minimum Front Lot Line Length – 50 feet.
(1) Notwithstanding the Minimum Yard
Dimensions, but subject to all other
applicable Code provisions, a fence or
retaining wall may be located in a Yard,
provided that a fence or retaining wall
over six feet in height shall be setback
from all Lot Lines a distance at least
equal to the height of such fence or
retaining wall.
(2) An Accessory Structure may
encroach up to 40 percent into any
required Yard subject to the following:
(a) The Yard being modified is not
contiguous to a road.
(b) The Accessory Structure does
not exceed five feet in height or
exceed a footprint of ten square feet,
and
(c) The applicant demonstrates the
proposal complies with the fire code
as administered by the applicable
fire service agency.
(3) A Variance is required for any
Accessory Structure that encroaches
more than 40 percent into any required
Yard.
 (D) The minimum yard requirement shall be
increased where the yard abuts a street having
insufficient right-of-way width to serve the area.
The county Road Official shall determine the
necessary right-of-way widths based upon the
county “Design and Construction Manual” and
the Planning Director shall determine any
additional yard requirements in consultation
with the Road Official.
 (E) Structures such as barns, silos,
windmills, antennae, chimneys or similar
structures may exceed the height requirement if
located at least 30 feet from any property line.
4-62 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (F) Agricultural structures and equine
facilities such as barns, stables, silos, farm
equipment sheds, greenhouses or similar
structures that do not exceed the maximum
height requirement may have a reduced
minimum rear yard of less than 30 feet, to a
minimum of 10 feet, if:
(1) The structure is located at least 60
feet from any existing dwelling, other
than the dwelling(s) on the same tract,
where the rear property line is also the
rear property line of the adjacent tract,
or

(2) The structure is located at least 40
feet from any existing dwelling, other
than the dwelling(s) on the same tract,
where the rear property line is also the
side property line of the adjacent tract.

(3) Placement of an agricultural related
structure under these provisions in (F)
does not change the minimum yard
requirements for future dwellings on
adjacent property.
 (G) On-site sewage disposal, storm
water/drainage control, water systems unless
these services are provided by public or
community source, required parking, and yard
areas shall be provided on the lot.
(1) Sewage and stormwater disposal
systems for existing development may
be off-site in easement areas reserved
for that purpose.
(2) Stormwater/drainage control systems
are required for new impervious
surfaces.  The system shall be adequate
to ensure that the rate of runoff from the
lot for the 10 year 24-hour storm event
is no greater than that before the
development.
 (H) New, replacement, or expansion of
existing dwellings shall minimize impacts to
existing farm uses on adjacent land (contiguous
or across the street) by:
(1) Recording a covenant that
implements the provisions of the Oregon
Right to Farm Law in ORS 30.936
where the farm use is on land in the
EFU zone; or
(2) Where the farm use does not occur
on land in the EFU zone, the owner shall
record a covenant that recognizes and
accepts that farm activities including
tilling, spraying, harvesting, and farm
management activities during irregular
times, occur on adjacent property and in
the general area.
 (I) Required parking, and yard areas shall be
provided on the same Lot of Record as the
development being served.
 (J) All exterior lighting shall comply with
MCC 39.6850.
(Ord. 1309, Amended, 08/18/2022; Ord. 1271, Amended,
03/14/2019)

 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-63
(S-1 2023)
§ 39.4330 LOTS OF EXCEPTION AND
PROPERTY LINE
ADJUSTMENTS.
 (A) Lots of Exception
 An exception to permit creation of a parcel
of less than 20 acres, out of a Lot of Record,
may be authorized when in compliance with the
dimensional requirements of MCC 39.4325(C)
through (E). Any exception shall be based on the
following findings:
(1) The Lot of Record to be divided has
two or more permanent habitable
dwellings;
(2) The permanent habitable dwellings
were lawfully established on the Lot of
Record before October 4, 2000;
(3) Each new parcel created by the
partition will have at least one of the
habitable dwellings; and
(4) The partition will not create any
vacant parcels on which a new dwelling
could be established.
 (B) Property Line Adjustment
 Pursuant to the applicable provisions in
MCC 39.9300, the approval authority may grant
a property line adjustment between two
contiguous Lots of Record upon finding that the
approval criteria in (1) and (2) are met. The
intent of the criteria is to ensure that the property
line adjustment will not increase the potential
number of lots or parcels in any subsequent land
division proposal over that which could occur on
the entirety of the combined lot areas before the
adjustment.
(1) The following dimensional and
access requirements are met:
(a) The relocated common property
line is in compliance with all
minimum yard and minimum front
lot line length requirements;
(b) If the properties abut a street, the
required access requirements of
MCC 39.4345 are met after the
relocation of the common property
line; and
(2) One of the following situations
occurs:
(a) The lot or parcel proposed to be
reduced in area is larger than 20
acres prior to the adjustment and
remains 20 acres or larger in area
after the adjustment, or
(b) The lot or parcel proposed to be
enlarged in area is less than 40 acres
in area prior to the adjustment and
remains less than 40 acres in area
after the adjustment.
§ 39.4335 LOT SIZES FOR
CONDITIONAL USES.
The minimum lot size for a Conditional Use
permitted pursuant to MCC 39.4320, except
subsection (C)(1) thereof, shall be based upon:
 (A) The site size needs of the proposed use;
 (B) The nature of the proposed use in
relation to its impact on nearby properties;
 (C) Consideration of the purposes of this
base zone; and
 (D) A finding that the lot or parcel is at least
two acres in area and in the West of Sandy River
Rural Plan Area, if a lot or parcel is created to
support a conditional use, a finding that the
remainder parcel is not less than five acres.
§ 39.4340 OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING.
Off-Street parking and loading shall be provided
as required by MCC 39.6500 through 39.6600.
§ 39.4345 ACCESS.
All lots and parcels in this base zone shall abut a
public street or shall have other access
determined by the approval authority to be safe
and convenient for pedestrians and for passenger
and emergency vehicles.  This access
4-64 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
requirement does not apply to a pre-existing lot
and parcel that constitutes a Lot of Record
described in MCC 39.3080(B).
4.B.2 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR)
§
