39.4650- PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Orient Commercial-
Industrial base zone is to provide for small-scale
low-impact commercial and industrial uses that
primarily serve the population of the immediate
Rural Community area, and the immediate
surrounding rural area as well as tourists
traveling through the area.  The uses allowed
within the zone should reinforce the rural nature
of the area and not adversely impact agricultural
uses in the area.
§ 39.4652 AREA AFFECTED.
MCC 39.4650 through 39.4695 shall apply to
those lands designated OCI on the Multnomah
County Zoning Map.
§ 39.4655 USES.
No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall be hereafter
erected, altered or enlarged in this base zone
except for the uses listed in MCC 39.4660
4-106 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
through 39.4675 when found to comply with
MCC 39.4680 through 39.4695 provided such
uses occur on a Lot of Record.
§ 39.4660 ALLOWED USES.
The following uses and their accessory uses are
allowed, subject to all applicable supplementary
regulations contained in MCC Chapter 39.
 (A) Single-family detached dwelling.
 (B) Farm Use, as defined in ORS 215.203
(2)(a) for the following purposes only:
(1) Raising and harvesting of crops;
(2) Raising of livestock and honeybees;
or
(3) Any other agricultural or
horticultural purpose or animal
husbandry purpose or combination
thereof, except as provided in MCC
39.4665 and 39.4675. This subsection
does not permit the raising of fowl or
fur-bearing animals for sale, the keeping
of swine, or a feedlot.
 (C) Propagation or harvesting of forest
products.
 (D) Public and private conservation areas
and structures for the protection of water, soil,
open space, forest and wildlife resources.
 (E) Type A home occupations pursuant to
MCC 39.8800.
 (F) Accessory Structures subject to the
following:
(1) The Accessory Structure is
customarily accessory or incidental to
any use permitted or approved in this
base zone and is a structure identified in
the following list:
(a) Garages or carports;
(b) Pump houses;
(c) Garden sheds;
(d) Workshops;
(e) Storage sheds, including
shipping containers used for storage
only;
(f) Greenhouses;
(g) Woodsheds;
(h) Shelter for pets, horses or
livestock and associated buildings
such as: manure storage, feed
storage, tack storage, and indoor
exercise area;
(i) Swimming pools, pool houses,
hot tubs, saunas, and associated
changing rooms;
(j) Sport courts;
(k) Gazebos, pergolas, and detached
decks;
(l) Fences, gates, or gate support
structures; and
(m) Mechanical equipment such as
air conditioning units, heat pumps
and electrical boxes; and
(n) Similar structures.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental u nit,
sleeping quarters or any other residential
use.
(3) The Accessory Structure may
contain one sink.
(4) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain:
(a) More than one story;
(b) Cooking Facilities;
(c) A toilet;
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-107
(S-1 2023)
(d) Bathing facilities such as a
shower or bathing tub;
(e) A mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item
designed to aid in sleep as a primary
purpose, unless such item is
disassembled for storage; or
(f) A closet built into a wall.
(5) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
(6) The combined footprints of all
buildings accessory to an accessory
dwelling unit (ADU) shall not exceed
combined footprints of 400 square feet
and the combined footprints of all
Accessory Buildings on a Lot of Record,
including buildings accessory to an
ADU, shall not exceed 2,500 square
feet.
(7) An Accessory Structure exceeding
any of the Allowed Use provisions
above, except for the combined
footprints allowed for all buildings
accessory to an ADU, shall be
considered through the Review Use
provisions.
(8) Buildings in conjunction with farm
uses as defined in ORS 215.203 are not
subject to these provisions. Such
buildings shall be used for their allowed
farm purposes only and, unless so
authorized, shall not be used, whether
temporarily or permanently, as a
primary dwelling, accessory dwelling
unit, apartment, guesthouse, housing
rental unit, sleeping quarters or any
other residential use.
 (G) Family Day Care.
 (H) Actions taken in response to an
emergency/disaster event as defined in MCC
39.2000 pursuant to the provisions of MCC
39.6900.
 (I) Signs, as provided in this chapter.
 (J) Transportation facilities and
improvements that serve local needs or are part
of the adopted Multnomah County Functional
Classification of Trafficways plan, except that
transit stations and park and ride lots shall be
subject to the provisions of Community Service
Uses.
 (K) Solar, photovoltaic and wind turbine
alternative energy production facilities accessory
to uses permitted in the base zone, provided that:
(1) All systems shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The system is an accessory
alternative energy system as defined
in MCC 39.2000;
(b) The system meets all overlay
requirements;
(c) The system is mounted to a
ground mount, to the roof of the
dwelling or accessory structure, or
to a wind tower;
(2)  The overall height of solar energy
systems shall not exceed the peak of the
roof of the building on which the system
is mounted;
(3)  Wind Turbine Systems:
(a) Wind turbine systems shall be
set back from all property lines a
distance equal to or greater than the
combined height of the turbine
tower and blade length. Height is
measured from grade to the top of
the wind generator blade when it is
at its highest point;
(b) No lighting on wind turbine
towers is allowed except as required
by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other federal or
state agency.
4-108 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(c) The land owner signs and
records a covenant stating they are
responsible for the removal of the
system if it is abandoned. In the case
of a sale or transfer of property, the
new property owner shall be
responsible for the use and/or
removal of the system. Systems
unused for one consecutive year are
considered abandoned.
 (L) Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU), subject
to the following standards:

(1) The ADU is sited entirely inside the
urban growth boundary.

(2) The ADU is not accessory to a health
hardship dwelling or any other type of
temporary dwelling.

(3) Transportation Impacts shall be
mitigated per Multnomah County Road
Rules. The ADU shall use the same
lawfully established driveway entrance as
the single -family dwelling, although the
driveway may be extended to the ADU. No
variance, adjustment, deviation or any
other modification to this shared driveway
provision is allowed.

(4) The floor area of the ADU shall not
exceed either 800 square feet, or 75% of the
floor area of the single -family dwelling to
which the ADU is accessory, whichever is
less.

(5) The ADU shall either be:

(a) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
single-family dwelling;

(b) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
building that is accessory to a single -
family dwelling, provided that the
accessory building existed on the
effective date of this ordinance;

(c) Attached to or located within the
interior of a lawfully established
building that is accessory to a single -
family dwelling, provided that the
accessory building is located at least 7
feet and no more than 20 feet from the
single family dwelling, measured at the
closest points between exterior walls of
both buildings.  Chimneys, eaves,
building and window trim are not
included in the measurement above.
No variance, adjustment, deviation or
any other modification to any of the
distances listed in this provision are
allowed; or

(d) Detached,  provided that the
detached ADU is located at least 7 feet
and no more than 20 feet from the
single family dwelling, measured at the
closest points between exterior walls of
both buildings.  Chimneys, eaves,
building and window trim are not
included in the  measurement above.
No variance, adjustment, deviation or
any other modification to any of the
distances listed in this provision are
allowed.

(6) An attached or interior ADU shall
include at least one separate exterior
doorway to the outside. Internal
entrance(s) to the attached building are
allowed.

(7) The following designs are not
permitted for use as an ADU:
Recreational vehicle, park model
recreational vehicle, yurt or any other
similar design not intended for
permanent human occupancy or any
structure unable to meet all applicable
construction or installation standards.

(8) Short -term rental of the ADU is
prohibited.  For purposes of this
subsection, short-term rental is defined as
fee-based occupancy for a period less
than 30 consecutive calendar days.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-109
(S-1 2023)
Month-to-month rental agreements for
long-term purposes are not short -term
rental.

(9) The land owner shall sign and record
with the county a cove nant stating that
the ADU cannot be used for short -term
rental, as defined in this section.  The
covenant shall apply until such time the
subject property is annexed into a city
and no longer subject to county land use
regulations.

§ 39.4665 REVIEW USES.
The commercial and industrial uses listed in this
section may be permitted when found to meet
the approval criteria in MCC 39.4670 unless
other approval criteria are listed for the use, and
are subject to Design Review approval.  Uses in
this section shall be processed as Type II
decisions pursuant to MCC 39.1100 through
39.1240.
 (A) Small-scale low impact rural service
commercial uses such as local stores, shops,
offices, repair shops, and similar uses including
the uses listed below.
(1) Automobile Repair,
(2) Restaurant,
(3) Tavern,
(4) Professional Office,
(5) Garden supply store,
(6) Hardware store,
(7) Retail bakery,
(8) Service station,
(9) Beauty and barber shop,
(10) Video tape rental.
 (B) The small-scale low impact industrial
uses listed below.
(1) Manufacturing and processing of:
(a) Apparel and other finished
products made from fabric;
(b) Millwork, veneer, plywood, and
structural wood members;
(c) Wood containers;
(d) Wood products, not elsewhere
classified;
(e) Furniture and fixtures;
(f) Stone, clay, glass products
except: cement, ready-mix concrete,
and minerals and earths ground or
otherwise treated;
(g) Fabricated metal products;
(h) Household appliances;
(i) Electric lighting and wiring
equipment;
(j) Communications equipment;
(k) Electronic components and
accessories;
(l). Motor vehicle parts and
accessories;
(m) Laboratory apparatus and
analytical, optical, measuring, and
controlling instruments;
(n) Food and kindred products.
(2) Freight trucking terminal, with or
without maintenance facility;
(3) Wholesale trade; or
(4) Automotive repair.
 (C) Commercial or industrial uses allowable
in the EFU base zones or any  CFU base zone,
and agricultural support services.  These uses
shall not be subject to the small-scale low
impact requirement that defines the commercial
or industrial uses in (A) and (B) above.
4-110 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
 (D) Wholesale or retail sales, limited to
those products raised or grown on the premises,
subject to the following condition:
 The location and design of any building,
stand, or sign in conjunction with wholesale or
retail sales shall be subject to approval of the
Planning Director on a finding that the location
and design are compatible with the character of
the area.  This use shall not be subject to the
Review Uses approval criteria in MCC 39.4670
or Design Review.
 (E) Wireless communications facilities that
employ concealment technology or co-location
as described in MCC 39.7710(B) pursuant to the
applicable approval criteria of MCC 39.7700
through 39.7765. This use shall not be subject to
the Review Uses approval criteria in MCC
39.4670 below.
 (F) Commercial or industrial uses that
exceeded the size limit for small-scale low
impact uses on January 1, 2003, and that
primarily support the needs of the rural area,
shall not be subject to the size limit, except that
expansion may not exceed 25% of the floor area
of buildings that existed on that date.
 (G) Temporary uses when approved
pursuant to MCC 39.8700 and 39.8750.
 (H) Property Line Adjustment pursuant to
all applicable approval criteria, including but not
limited to the provisions of MCC 39.4682.
 (I) Consolidation of Parcels and Lots
pursuant to MCC 39.9200 and Replatting of
Partition and Subdivision Plats pursuant to MCC
39.9650.
 (J) Structures or uses customarily accessory
or incidental to any use permitted or approved in
this base zone, which do not meet the “accessory
structures” standard in MCC 39.4660 Allowed
Uses, but which meet the following provisions:
(1) The Accessory Structure shall not be
designed or used, whether temporarily
or permanently, as a primary dwelling,
accessory dwelling unit, apartment,
guesthouse, housing rental unit, sleeping
quarters or any other residential unit.
(2) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a bathing tub.
(3) Any toilet or bathing facilities, such
as a shower, shall be located on the
ground floor of any multi-story building.
(4) An Accessory Structure containing a
toilet or bathing facilities shall not
contain Cooking Facilities.
(5) The Accessory Structure shall not
contain a mattress, bed, Murphy bed,
cot, or any other similar item designed
to aid in sleep as a primary purpose,
unless such item is disassembled for
storage.
(6) The applicant must show that
building features or combined building
footprints exceeding the Allowed Use
provisions are the minimum possible
departure from the Allowed Use
standards to accommodate the use.
(7) Compliance with MCC 39.8860 is
required.
§ 39.4670 REVIEW USES APPROVAL
CRITERIA.
 (A) The proposed use will not force a
significant change in, or significantly increase
the cost of, accepted farm or forest practices on
surrounding lands devoted to farm or forest use;
and
 (B) The proposed use will not, by itself or in
combination with existing uses in the
community, result in public health hazards or
adverse environmental impacts that violate state
or federal water quality regulation; and
 (C) The proposed use will not, by itself or in
combination with existing uses in the
community, exceed the carrying capacity of the
soil or of existing water supply resources and
sewer services; and
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-111
(S-1 2023)
 (D) The proposed use will not create
significant adverse effects on existing uses or
permitted uses on adjacent land, considering
such factors as noise, dust and odors.
 (E) The proposed use will primarily support
the needs of residents of the rural area or tourists
visiting the area.
§ 39.4675 CONDITIONAL USES.
 (A) The community service uses listed in
MCC 39.7520, subject to the provisions of
39.7500 through 39.7525; and
 (B) State or regional trail for which a master
plan that is consistent with OAR Division 34
State and Local Park Planning has been adopted
into the comprehensive plan. Development of
the trail and accessory facilities shall be subject
to the approval criteria in 39.7515(A) through
(H).  Accessory facilities shall be of a size and
scale that is consistent with the rural character of
the area.
§ 39.4680 DIMENSIONAL
REQUIREMENTS AND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All development proposed in this base zone shall
comply with the applicable provisions of this
section.
 (A) Except as provided in MCC 39.3120,
39.4682, and 39.4685, the minimum lot size
shall be one acre.
 (B) Minimum Yard Dimensions - Feet
Front Side Street Side Rear
30 10 30 30

Maximum Structure Height - 35 feet
Minimum Front Lot Line Length - 50 feet.
(1) Notwithstanding the Minimum Yard
Dimensions, but subject to all other
applicable Code provisions, a fence or
retaining wall may be located in a Yard,
provided that a fence or retaining wall
over six feet in height shall be setback
from all Lot Lines a distance at least
equal to the height of such fence or
retaining wall.
(2) An Accessory Structure may
encroach up to 40 percent into any
required Yard subject to the following:
(a) The Yard being modified is not
contiguous to a road.
(b) The Accessory Structure does
not exceed five feet in height or
exceed a footprint of ten square feet,
and
(c) The applicant demonstrates the
proposal complies with the fire code
as administered by the applicable
fire service agency.
(3) A Variance is required for any
Accessory Structure that encroaches
more than 40 percent into any required
Yard.
 (C) The minimum yard requirement shall be
increased where the yard abuts a street having
insufficient right-of-way width to serve the area.
The county Road Official shall determine the
necessary right-of-way widths based upon the
county “Design and Construction Manual” and
the Planning Director shall determine any
additional yard requirements in consultation
with the Road Official.
 (D) Structures such as barns, silos,
windmills, antennae, chimneys, or similar
structures may exceed the height requirement if
located at least 30 feet from any property line.
 (E) On-site sewage disposal, storm
water/drainage control, water systems unless
these services are provided by public or
community source, required parking, and yard
areas shall be provided on the lot.
(1) Sewage and stormwater disposal
systems for existing development may
be off-site in easement areas reserved
for that purpose.
4-112 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2023)
(2) Stormwater/drainage control systems
are required for new impervious
surfaces. The system shall be adequate
to ensure that the rate of runoff from the
lot for the 10 year 24-hour storm event
is no greater than that before the
development.
 (F) New, replacement, or expansion of
existing dwellings shall minimize impacts to
existing farm uses on adjacent land (contiguous
or across the street) by:
(1) Recording a covenant that
implements the provisions of the Oregon
Right to Farm Law in ORS 30.936
where the farm use is on land in the
EFU zone; or
(2) Where the farm use does not occur
on land in the EFU zone, the owner shall
record a covenant that states they
recognizes and accepts that farm
activities including tilling, spraying,
harvesting, and farm management
activities during irregular hours occur on
adjacent property and in the area.
 (G) All exterior lighting shall comply with
MCC 39.6850.
(Ord. 1271, Amended, 03/14/2019)

§ 39.4682 PROPERTY LINE
ADJUSTMENTS.
 (A) Pursuant to the applicable provisions in
MCC 39.9300, the approval authority may grant
a property line adjustment between two
contiguous Lots of Record upon finding that the
approval criteria in (1) and (2) are met. The
intent of the criteria is to ensure that the property
line adjustment will not increase the potential
number of lots or parcels in any subsequent land
division proposal over that which could occur on
the entirety of the combined lot areas before the
adjustment.
(1) The following dimensional and
access requirements are met:
(a) The relocated common property
line is in compliance with all
minimum yard and minimum front
lot line length requirements;
(b) If the properties abut a street, the
required access requirements of
MCC 39.4695 are met after the
relocation of the common property
line; and
(2) At least one of the following
situations occurs:
(a) The lot or parcel proposed to be
reduced in area is larger than 1 acre
prior to the adjustment and remains
1 acre or larger in area after the
adjustment, or
(b) The lot or parcel proposed to be
enlarged in area is less than 2 acres
in area prior to the adjustment and
remains less than 2 acres in area
after the adjustment.
§ 39.4685 LOT SIZES FOR
CONDITIONAL AND REVIEW
USES.
The minimum lot size for the uses listed in MCC
39.4665 and 39.4675 shall be based upon:
 (A) The site size needs of the proposed use;
 (B) The nature of the proposed use in
relation to its impact on nearby properties.
 (C) Consideration of the purposes of the
base zone.
§ 39.4690 OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING.
Off-street parking and loading shall be provided
as required by MCC 39.6500 through 39.6600.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 4-113
(S-1 2023)
§ 39.4695 ACCESS.
All lots and parcels in this base zone shall abut a
public street or shall have other access
determined by the approval authority to be safe
and convenient for pedestrians and passenger
and emergency vehicles.  This access
requirement does not apply to a pre-existing lot
and parcel that constitutes a Lots of Record
described in MCC 39.3120(B).
4.D – URBAN BASE ZONES
4.D.1 – MULTIPLE USE FOREST (MUF)
§
