39.5300- PURPOSES.
The purposes of the Planned Development
Overlay, MCC 39.5300 through MCC 39.5350
(PD), are to provide a means of creating planned
environments through the application of flexible
and diversified land development standards; to
encourage the application of new techniques and
new technology to community development
which will result in superior living or
development arrangements; to use land
efficiently and thereby reduce the costs of
housing, maintenance, street systems and utility
networks; to promote energy conservation and
crime prevention; to relate developments to the
natural environment and to inhabitants,
employers, employees, customers, and other
users in harmonious ways.
§ 39.5305 AREAS AFFECTED.
The PD may be applied only in the BRC, MUA-
20, OR, PH-RC, RC, RR, and SRC zones.
§ 39.5310 DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND
PROGRAM CONTENTS.
 (A) The preliminary Development Plan and
Program shall consist of plans, maps or
diagrams drawn in sufficient detail to indicate
the nature of the plan elements and a written
narrative descriptive of the program elements.
(1) Plan Elements.
(a) Proposed land uses and
residential densities.
(b) Means of access, circulation and
parking.
5-26 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2022)
(c) Building types and locations.
(d) Parks, playgrounds, paths and
open spaces.
(e) Preliminary site analysis diagram
as defined in MCC 39.8025 (C).
(f) A land division plan if the land is
to be divided.
(2) Program Elements.
(a) A narrative statement of the
goals and objectives of the planned
development.
(b) Tables showing overall density
of any proposed residential
development and showing density
by dwelling types and intensity of
any commercial, industrial or other
employment uses.
(c) A narrative statement indicating
how the proposed planned
development complies with the
applicable Comprehensive Plan
Policies.
(d) A general timetable of
development.
(e) The proposed ownership pattern.
(f) An operation and maintenance
proposal.
§ 39.5315 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
 (A) Action on the Preliminary Development
Plan and Program shall be based on findings that
the following are satisfied:
(1) The applicable provisions of the
comprehensive plan;
(2) The applicable provisions of MCC
39.9000 et seq., the Land Division
Ordinance;
(3) Any exceptions from the standards
or requirements of the underlying
district are warranted by the design and
amenities incorporated in the
Development Plan and Program, as
related to the purposes stated in MCC
39.5300;
(4) The system of ownership and the
means of developing, preserving and
maintaining open space is suitable to the
purposes of the proposal;
(5) The provisions of MCC 39.5330;
(6) The proposed development can be
substantially completed within four
years of the approval or according to the
development stages proposed under
MCC 39.5345;
(7) The Development Standards of MCC
39.5325, 39.5335 and 39.5340;
(8) The purposes stated in MCC
39.5300;
 (B) Approval of the Final Development Plan
and Program shall be based on findings that the
following are satisfied:
(1) The final Plan and Program are
consistent with the approved
Preliminary Development Plan and
Program and the modifications or
conditions attached thereto;
(2) The Development Standards of
MCC39.5320;
(3) The criteria of MCC 39.8040 and the
standards of MCC 39.8045.
§ 39.5320 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
The Development Standards stated in MCC
39.5325 through 39.5340 shall apply to an
approved Planned Development. In the case of a
conflict between a standard of the base zone and
that of the PD, the standard of the PD shall
apply.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 5-27
(S-1 2022)
§ 39.5325 MINIMUM SITE SIZE.
A Planned Development overlay shall be
established only on a parcel of land found to be
suitable for the proposed development and of
sufficient size to be planned and developed in a
manner consistent with the purposes stated in
MCC 39.5300.
§ 39.5330 RELATIONSHIP OF THE
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT TO
ENVIRONMENT.
 (A) The Development Plan and Program
shall indicate how the proposal will be
compatible with the natural environment.
 (B) The elements of the Development Plan
and Program shall promote the conservation of
energy, and may include such factors as the
location and extent of site improvements, the
orientation of buildings and usable open spaces
with regard to solar exposure and climatic
conditions, the types of buildings and the
selection of building materials in regard to the
efficient use of energy and the degree of site
modification required in the proposal.
 (C) The Development Plan and Program
shall be designed to provide freedom from
hazards and to offer appropriate opportunities
for residential privacy and for transition from
public to private spaces.
 (D) The location and number of points of
access to the site, the interior circulation
patterns, the separations between pedestrians
and moving and parked vehicles, and the
arrangement of parking areas in relation to
buildings, structures and uses shall be designed
to maximize safety and convenience and be
compatible with neighboring road systems,
buildings, structures and uses.
§ 39.5335 OPEN SPACE.
Open space in a Planned Development overlay
means the land area used for scenic, landscaping
or open recreational purposes within the
development.
 (A) Open space shall not include street
rights-of-way, driveways or open parking areas.
 (B) Locations, shapes and sizes of open
space shall be consistent with the proposed uses
and purposes of the Planned Development.
 (C) Open spaces shall be suitably improved
for intended use. Open spaces containing natural
features worthy of preservation may be left
unimproved or may be improved to assure
protection of the features.
 (D) The development schedule shall provide
for coordination of the improvement of open
spaces with the construction of other site
improvements proposed in the Development
Plan and Program.
 (E) Assurance of the permanence of open
spaces may be required in the form of deeds,
covenants or the dedication of development
rights to Multnomah County or other approved
entity.
 (F) The approval authority may require that
instruments of conveyance provide that in the
event an open space is permitted to deteriorate
or is not maintained in a condition consistent
with the approved plan and program, the County
may at its option cause such maintenance to be
done and assess the costs to the affected
property owners. Any instruments guaranteeing
the maintenance of open spaces shall be
reviewed as to form by the County Attorney.
§ 39.5340 DENSITY COMPUTATION
FOR RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS.
 (A) In order to preserve the integrity of the
Comprehensive Plan and relate a residential
Planned Development to it, the number of
dwelling units permitted shall be determined by
dividing the total site area by the minimum lot
area per dwelling unit required by the underlying
district or districts in which the Planned
Development is located.
 (B) Optional Density Standards within the
Urban Plan Area. The following standards for
the calculation of residential density may be
used singularly or in combination, when
approved by the Planning Commission:
5-28 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE
(S-1 2022)
(1)  The permitted number of dwelling
units determined under subsection (A)
above may be increased up to 25 percent
upon a finding by the Planning
Commission that such increased density
will contribute to:
(a)  Satisfaction of the need for
additional urban area housing of the
type proposed;
(b)  The location of housing which
is convenient to commercial,
employment and community
services and opportunities;
(c)  The creation of a land use
pattern which is complementary to
the community and its identity, and
to the community design process;
(d)  The conservation of energy;
(e)  The efficient use of
transportation facilities; and
(f)  The effective use of land and of
available utilities and facilities.
(2)  The permitted number of dwelling
units may be increased above those
computed under subsection (A) or (B) of
this section, upon a finding by the
Planning Commission that:
(a)  The total number of persons
occupying the site will not exceed
the total otherwise permitted or
authorized in the district, based
upon the difference between the
average family size occupying
permitted units in the vicinity and
the family size limited by the
proposed number of bedrooms, the
proposed number of kitchens, the
age composition of prospective
residents, or other similar
occupancy limitations; and
(b)  The proposal will satisfy the
provisions of subsection (B) (1) of
this section.
§ 39.5345 STAGING.
 (A) The applicant may elect to develop the
site in successive stages in a manner indicated in
the Development Plan and Program. Each such
stage shall satisfy the requirements of the PD.
 (B) In acting to approve the Preliminary
Development Plan and Program, the approval
authority may require that development be
completed in specific stages if public facilities
are not otherwise adequate to service the entire
development.
§ 39.5350 PERMITTED USES.
In a residential zone, the following uses may be
permitted in a Planned Development overlay:
 (A) Housing types may include only
duplexes and single family detached or attached
dwellings.
 (B) In the LR-7 and the LR-5 districts,
outside a Developed Neighborhood as
designated in the Community Plan, the housing
type may include mobile homes in a mobile
home park, subject to the development standards
of MCC 39.8610.
 (C) A related commercial use which is
designated to serve the development of which it
is a part, upon approval by the Planning
Commission.
 (D) A Community Service use listed in
MCC 39.7500 through 39.7525 and 39.8400
when designated to serve the development or the
adjacent area of which it is a part, upon approval
by the approval authority.
(1) A Community Service use, when
approved under the provisions of MCC
39.7500 through 39.7525 and 39.8400
may also be designed to serve the
adjacent area outside the Planned
Development if found by the approval
authority to be appropriate and
consistent with Comprehensive Plan
policies.
 CHAPTER 39 – MULTNOMAH COUNTY ZONING CODE 5-29
(S-1 2022)
 (E) A use or structure customarily accessory
or incidental to a permitted or approved use.
 (F) For an underlying commercial district
within the Urban Plan Area, the following uses
may be permitted in a Planned Development
overlay:
(1)  Uses permitted in the underlying
district.
(2)  Community Service Uses when
approved by the Planning Commission
under the provisions of MCC 39.8005
through 39.8020.
(3)  Any other use as approved by the
Planning Commission when found to be
consistent with the Development Plan
and Program and the purposes of the
PD.
5.G – PROTECTED AGGREGATE AND
MINERAL SITES (PAM)
§
