Chapter 19.110

VILLAGE GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

19.110.010 Purpose.

19.110.020 Village concept.

19.110.030 Area of application.

19.110.035 Signs and development standards.

19.110.040 Definitions.

19.110.050 Conflict clause.

19.110.060 Phased subdivision.

19.110.010 Purpose.

This section implements the policies of the Fairview Village community plan by providing a mixture of residential uses as well as retail/office, commercial and business park uses. These uses are located in the areas where suitable services and facilities are currently provided or can be provided as development occurs. In addition, this plan area allows for pedestrian-oriented development with good connections via the sidewalks, trails and street system from residential areas to parks, schools, open spaces, retail and office uses. (Ord. 1-2024 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

19.110.020 Village concept.

This section describes the desired feel and texture of a mixed use community development. Fairview Village is designed to be a functioning mixed use neighborhood with a range of housing types and commercial stores. Chapters 19.110 through 19.155 FMC are intended to implement this objective and to ensure a successful, livable neighborhood.

The Village will provide a commercial core or downtown area to provide the daily necessities of nearby residents. The Village main street should be architecturally unified with wide, landscaped, pedestrian-friendly sidewalks. Retail and office buildings are brought to or near the sidewalks with parking located to the rear of the site. The design of the streets should slow the flow of automobile traffic and allow pedestrians to easily cross at intersections. Principal retail uses such as grocery anchors and hardware stores will have adequate parking and walkways that encourage pedestrian travel to the branch bank, dry cleaners, video store and other retail stores and residences. This commercial core will be located south of NE Halsey, a major bus route.

The commercial core is immediately surrounded by high density housing. Apartments and townhouses are located to ensure a two- to five-minute walk for basic necessities. This segment of the Village, which will provide the fabric and feel of urban living, is intended to encourage a diminished reliance on the automobile for transport to basic services.

As the streets move away from the grid of the commercial core they begin to meld with the topography of the land and Fairview Creek. The housing becomes less dense with small and larger lot single-unit homes, all still within walking distance of the Village center. A network of pedestrian ways and trails will provide easy access for everyone in the community. (Ord. 1-2024 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

19.110.030 Area of application.

The Fairview Village community plan is applied to the area located generally east of the NE 207th Connector, south of NE Halsey Street, north of NE Glisan Street, and west of NE 223rd Avenue as illustrated in Figure V-1, following Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

19.110.035 Signs and development standards.

A. Signs.

1. All signs located in Fairview Village shall be in conformance with sign regulations in Chapter 19.170 FMC.

2. Freestanding Monument Entry Signs. These signs are intended to identify the village entrances. The number and location of these signs is shown in Figure V-8, following Chapter 19.155 FMC.

a. Area. Maximum face area of 75 square feet.

b. Height shall be a maximum of 12 feet above grade.

c. Width shall be limited to a maximum of 15 feet.

d. Placement. Sign base shall be set on a foundation at finished grade level, anchored to the ground.

e. Location. Sign locations shall be located at four designated entrances into the village (Figure V-8, following Chapter 19.155 FMC).

f. Base Dimension. The base/foundation dimensions shall not exceed 36 inches in depth or 15 feet in width and shall be no less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches in height.

B. Development Standards. Development standards specific to each zoning district in Fairview Village are located in each of the corresponding sections: Chapter 19.115 FMC, Village Single-Family, Chapter 19.120 FMC, Village Townhouse Residential, Chapter 19.125 FMC, Village Apartment, Chapter 19.130 FMC, Village Office, and Chapter 19.135 FMC, Village Commercial and Mixed Use. Additional development standards are located in Chapters 19.140, 19.145, and 19.150 FMC. (Ord. 2-2010 § 4)

19.110.040 Definitions.

The following definitions shall be utilized in the implementation of this chapter:

A. “Block frontage” means all of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature, or end of a dead end street. An intercepting street determines only the boundary of the block frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.

B. “Common line setback” means the combined setback distance between two structures on abutting lots.

C. “Curb radius” means the curved edge of the street at intersections, measured at the edge of the travel lanes. Curbs at intersections shall not intrude into the intersection beyond the specified maximum curb radius. Where streets of different use categories intersect, the requirements of the higher intensity use shall govern. The curb radius shall be handicapped accessible.

D. “Front porch” means an open roofed structure attached to the front of the dwelling unit. A front porch shall have a minimum depth of six feet and a minimum width of 12 feet and, except for insect screening, shall only have supporting columns visible above 42 inches from the finished porch floor level. Side and rear porches are not subject to these requirements. All or a portion of the front porch may encompass a ramp providing handicap access.

E. “Jurisdictional wetlands” means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, wet meadows, and similar areas.

F. “Net acre” means all area within a private development zone excluding public rights-of-way.

G. “Pedestrian way” means any off-street public accessway which is dedicated for the primary use of pedestrians and/or bicycles.

H. “Riparian area” means a terrestrial zone influenced by annual and intermittent water, a high water table, or wet soils. The riparian area is found adjacent to a body of water, such as a stream, lake, or estuary. Riparian vegetation includes native herbaceous plants, shrubs, understory trees, and canopy trees. The riparian area contributes shade, leaves, woody debris, and insects to a body of water.

I. “Tower element” means an inhabitable structure typically higher than its diameter and high relative to its surroundings that may be attached to a larger structure, and that may be fully enclosed or of skeleton framework.

J. “Visual clearance zone” means those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety. See diagram in Figure V-2, following Chapter 19.155 FMC. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

19.110.050 Conflict clause.

Within the Village when there is a conflict between the Village regulations and base zone, overlay zone, or other regulations of this code, the Village regulations control. All regulations of the base zone still apply except where expressly written otherwise. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)

19.110.060 Phased subdivision.

The Village development will be phased. When an applicant desires to record and develop subdivision plats covering portions of an approved tentative plan in phases, the approval authority may authorize a time schedule for platting the various phases. Each phase may be for a period of time in excess of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than seven years without resubmission of the tentative plan. Each phase so platted and developed shall conform to the applicable requirements of this code and the subdivision code. Portions platted after the passage of one year may be required to have modifications to avoid conflicts with a change in the Comprehensive Plan, Village district zoning code, or subdivision code. (Ord. 6-2001 § 1)
