702.01 Purpose

The intent of the Open Space Management (OSM) District is to preserve and manage the County's committed open space resources for the benefit, health, and welfare of the people. These resources provide the community with recreation areas, help satisfy a need for contrast with the built environment, protect natural areas and provide areas of quiet contemplation and enjoyment of the natural environment.

702.02 Areas Of Application

The OSM District shall apply to those areas identified as urban on the Comprehensive Plan and Mount Hood Community Plan maps, in Metro's Urban Reserve Areas, or identified in the Metropolitan Greenspaces Master Plan.

1 Parks, whether existing, acquired, or dedicated in the future (see Section 1011 for dedication requirements);

2 Other public and private recreation areas, including school playgrounds and golf courses;

3 Cemeteries;

4 Unique or distinctive natural areas which have been either dedicated to the public or preserved through an easement; and

5 Natural areas in Metro's Urban Reserve Areas or identified in the Metropolitan Greenspaces Master Plan, when under public or common ownership.

702.03 Primary Uses

1 Public and private outdoor recreation facilities, and parks, including covered but not enclosed areas. Such facilities may include ball fields, swimming pools, play equipment, driving ranges, tennis courts, community gardens, fountain courts, and plazas, provided such uses and facilities are not intended for the purpose of obtaining a commercial profit. These uses are allowed in the urban area and urban services areas. Outside the urban areas these uses are subject to Subsection 702.05;

2 Nature trails, bird sanctuaries, nature conservancies, and other similar natural areas provided such uses are not intended for the purpose of obtaining a commercial profit;

3 Cemeteries;

4 Utility cabinets, subject to Section 830, Utility Cabinets;

5 Utility facilities, except utility lines, in road rights-of-way;

6 Utility lines, except as established by Subsections 702.05(F) and (G);

7 Stormwater management facilities. In the Clackamas River flood plain: surface water management biofiltration ponds and surface water pollution reduction facilities that minimize impact on the natural environment;

8 Areas suitable for flood storage and flood mitigation purposes; and

9 Wetland mitigation and enhancement facilities.

702.04 Accessory Uses

1 Accessory uses listed under Subsection 702.04(B) may be allowed, provided that any structure shall be designed and integrated into the site by:

1 Minimizing visual impacts by landscaping; and

2 Providing skirting for manufactured dwellings, residential trailers, recreational vehicles, and other structures that do not have a continuous foundation.

2 Accessory uses permitted subject to the above conditions include:

1 A caretaker's dwelling;

2 Restroom and locker room facilities;

3 Information and interpretive centers;

4 Pro shops and other concession sales uses incidental to a primary use, provided the combined total area devoted to this use does not exceed 500 square feet; and

5 Maintenance buildings associated with a primary use;

3 Parking and loading areas;

4 Bus and mass transit shelters;

5 Security facilities, such as lights, gates, and fences;

6 Clubhouses and lodges;

7 Cemetery office buildings, crematories, and mausoleums in conjunction with a cemetery. Crematories are subject to Section 808, Cemeteries and Crematories;

8 Rainwater collection systems;

9 Solar collection systems;

10 Electric vehicle charging stations;

11 Stormwater management facilities;

12 Utility service equipment; and

13 Utility service lines.

702.05 Conditional Uses

The following are conditional uses in the OSM District, approval of which is subject to Section 1203, Conditional Uses.

1 Indoor recreation facilities, meeting rooms, interpretive centers, and other similar uses provided such uses are not intended for the purpose of obtaining a commercial profit;

2 Fire stations, public schools, and libraries when associated with open space or recreational facilities;

3 Places of worship, subject to Section 804;

4 Pro shops and other concession sales uses incidental to a primary use exceeding the area standards of Subsection 702.04(B)(4);

5 Water treatment facilities and other utility facilities that exceed the limitations of primary uses in Subsection 702.03;

6 Gas transmission lines;

7 Electric transmission lines;

8 Utility carrier cabinets that do not comply with Section 830, Utility Carrier Cabinets, and are outside a road right-of-way; and

9 Any use customarily provided in public or private recreation areas.

702.06 Development Standards

Development in the OSM District is subject to the applicable provisions of Sections 1000, Development Standards, and 1100, Development Review Process. In addition, improvements shall comply with the following standards:

1 Landscape the site to produce a setting appropriate to its function.

2 Provide an efficient internal circulation system and facilities layout plan.

3 Maximize access for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, and people with disabilities in active recreation areas.

4 Provide conveniences for users with disabilities.

5 In the case of parks, conform to the classifications and standards in Comprehensive Plan Table 9-1.

6 Locate principal and accessory buildings a minimum of 10 feet from any lot in a residential zoning district.

7 Community and Design Plans: Development within a Community or Design Plan area identified in Chapter 10, Community Plans and Design Plans, of the Comprehensive Plan shall comply with the specific policies and standards for the adopted Community or Design Plan.

[Amended by Ord. ZDO-224, 5/31/2011; Amended by Ord. ZDO-248, 10/13/2014; Amended by Ord. ZDO-268, 10/2/2018; Amended by Ord. ZDO-287, 8/3/2023; Amended by Ord. ZDO-288, 9/9/2024]
