Close
Print
Resize:

City of Happy Valley, OR

Tuesday, August 18, 2026

Title 16. Land Development Code

ARTICLE 16.1. INTRODUCTION

Chapter 16.12. DEFINITIONS

§ 16.12.010. Purpose.

The purpose of Chapter 16.12 is to define terms that are used frequently in the City of Happy Valley Development Code, to assist decision makers in interpreting and applying the Code. Some of the terms that are defined here may have different meanings in other communities. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular tense shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "shall" is always mandatory and the word "may" denotes a use of discretion. For the purposes of this title certain terms and words are defined in this section. Specific definitions which shall also apply to this title may be found in various appropriate sections throughout.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

§ 16.12.020. Applicability.

Definitions. The definitions in Section 16.12.030 apply to all actions and interpretations under the City of Happy Valley Development Code. The meanings given terms in this chapter may, in certain contexts in which they are used, be clearly inapplicable. In such cases the context in which a term is used will indicate its intended meaning, and that intent shall control. Where a term used in this Code is already defined in another part of the City of Happy Valley Code (e.g., the Building Code, etc.) the term is not redefined herein for purposes of that other code. Terms not defined in this Code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be considered a standard reference.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009)

§ 16.12.030. Definitions.

The following definitions are organized alphabetically and some related terms are also grouped together and cross-referenced under group leadings (e.g., Lot Types). See also Chapter 16.21 for descriptions of the land use districts.

Abutting.
Properties that share a common property line at any point along the boundary of either property. Abutting includes the terms adjacent, adjoining and contiguous. Abutting includes properties that are separated by a private roadway, driveway or drive aisle but does not include properties that are separated by a public right-of-way.

Access.
The way or means by which pedestrians and vehicles enter and leave property.

Access drive.
An improved internal street within a commercial development that provides vehicular access to a commercial complex or parking area, typically bordered by structures.

Access easement.
An easement recorded for the purposed of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. Cross access is a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more separate sites, so that the driver need not enter the public street system between sites.

Access management.
The systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings interchanges, and street connections to a roadway to minimize conflicts between turning and through vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. The purpose of access management is to provide vehicular access to land development in a manner that preserves the safety and efficiency of the transportation system. Public facility measures to support access management include roadway design applications, such as median treatments and auxiliary lanes, and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals. Measures that may be included as conditions of approval for development decisions include but are not limited to (1) standards such as minimum spacing of driveways and onsite vehicle storage requirements, (2) mitigations related to site conditions such as right-in-right-out only approaches, medians, dedicated turn lanes, and shared access approaches, and (3) provision for future opportunities for mitigation by land dedication or easement.

Access spacing/intersection spacing.
The minimum required distance from an intersection of a public or private street to the nearest driveway or other access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting street to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.

Accessible.
Two meanings are possible depending on the specific code provision: In general, accessible means approachable by pedestrians, vehicles or other transportation mode, as applicable. Accessible may also mean approachable and useable by people with disabilities, in conformance with the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act. Either or both definitions may apply in a particular situation.

Accessible route.
A route that can be used by a disabled person using a wheelchair and that is also usable by people with other disabilities.

Accessory.
Secondary or incidental to a primary use or structure.

Accessory dwelling unit.
A second dwelling unit created on a lot with a house, attached house, or manufactured home. The second unit is created auxiliary to, and is always smaller than, the house, attached house, or manufactured home.

Accessory parking facility.
A parking facility that provides parking for a specific use or uses. The facility may be located on or off the site of the use or uses to which it is accessory. A fee may or may not be charged. An accessory parking facility need not be in the same ownership as the specific uses to which it is accessory.

Accessory structure (or accessory building).
Structure of secondary importance or function on a site. The primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Examples of accessory structures include, but are not limited to: detached garages, and other structures. Excludes furniture, air conditioners, hot tubs, pools, etc. See also "primary structure."

Accessory use.
A use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site. See also "primary structure."

Accessway.
See "access drive."

Adjoining.
See "abutting."

Administrative.
A discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing, but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal.

Adult foster care.
A family home or facility in which residential care is provided for five or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage. "Provider" means any person operating an adult foster care home. See also "residential home/group care home."

Adverse impact or effect.
Negative effect that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust, property values, etc.).

Affordable housing.
Housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a specified level of income and spending no more than 30% of their income on housing expenses. For more information, contact the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services.

Agriculture.
The raising and harvesting of plants for the purpose of obtaining a profit. The raising of animals or plants for personal household use is permitted by right in all development districts in the City. See ORS 215.203(2)(a).

Alteration.
A physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. (See also "interior/exterior alteration.") Alteration does include the following:

1.

Changes to the exterior of a building;

2.

Changes to the interior of a building;

3.

Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;

4.

Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

5.

Changes to exterior improvements;

6.

Changes to landscaping; and

7.

Changes in the topography of the site.

Alternative antenna support structures.
Roofs of buildings, provided they are 30 feet or more in height above the street grade upon which such buildings front, church steeples, existing and replacement utility poles, flagpoles, street light standards, traffic light and traffic sign structures, billboards and commercial signs and other similar man-made structures and devices that extend vertically from the ground to a sufficient height or elevation to accommodate the attachment of antennas at an altitude or elevation that is commercially desirable for wireless communications signal transmission and reception.

Amateur radio.
The licensed and private use of designated radio bands, for purposes of private recreation, noncommercial exchange of messages, experimentation, self-training, and emergency communication pursuant to an amateur operator license granted by the Federal Communications Commission. Amateur radio is also commonly referred to as "ham radio."

Ambient.
Normal or background environmental condition, as in the level of light, dust or noise.

Antenna.
A specific device used to receive or capture incoming and/or to transmit outgoing radio-frequency (RF) signals, microwave signals and/or other communications energy transmitted from, or to be received by, other antennas. Antennas regulated by this title include omnidirectional (or "whip") antennas, directional (or "panel") antennas, micro cell, parabolic (or "dish") antennas and any other devices designed for the reception and/or transmission of radio-frequency (RF) signals or other communication technologies. Antenna does not include support structures, utility structures, or support towers.

Antenna array.
A grouping of two or more antennas on a single support structure, support tower, or utility structure.

Antenna height.
The vertical distance measured from the ground surface at grade to the tip of the highest point of the antenna on the proposed or existing structure.

Antenna support structure.
A structure or device specifically designed, constructed and/or erected for the purpose of attaching, mounting or otherwise affixing antennas at a height, altitude or elevation which is above the base of such structure. Antenna support structures include, but are not limited to, the following:

1.

"Lattice tower" which is a vertical support structure consisting of a network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which may be three, four or more sided;

2.

"Monopole tower" which is a vertical support structure consisting of a single vertical metal, concrete or wooden pole, pipe, tube or cylindrical structure, typically round or square, and driven into the ground or mounted upon or attached to a foundation.

Applicant.
A person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner, such as a builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.

Approval.
Written approval by the City or an approved representative of the City.

Arborist.
A professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist.

Arcade.
An arched or covered passageway; often along building fronts or between streets.

Architect.
An architect licensed by the State of Oregon.

Articulate/articulation.
The jointing and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.

Assessment.
For the purposes of Section 16.42.070, the amount imposed as a charge for street lighting service.

Attached structure.
Any structure that is attached to another structure by a fully enclosed common wall. Hallways, storage areas, breezeways, "I" beam or similar connections, roofs, decks or stairways do not qualify as attaching a structure.

Automobile-dependent development.
Primary or accessory uses servicing motor vehicles, or patrons in motor vehicles, such as motor vehicle repair, gas station, car wash, auto and truck sales, drive-up windows, kiosks, and similar uses.

Automobile-oriented development.
Development in which the site layout and design gives preference to automobiles as the primary mode of transportation.

Automobile-oriented use.
Automobiles and/or other motor vehicles are an integral part of the use, such as drive-through restaurants and banks.

Auxiliary support equipment.
All equipment necessary to provide wireless communications signals and data transmission, including, but not limited to, coaxial or fiber-optic cables, auxiliary power equipment, and electronic processing devices. Auxiliary support equipment also includes the shelter, cabinets, and other structural facilities used to house and shelter necessary equipment. Auxiliary support equipment does not include antennas, support towers, utility structures, support structures, or external cables and wires that are not required to provide backup power to a wireless communication facility.

Awning.
A shelter supported entirely by the exterior wall of a building and composed of nonrigid materials except for a supporting framework.

Bankful stage.
Defined in OAR 141-85-010 (definitions for Removal/Fill Permits) as the stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of a stream or other waters of the State and begin to inundate upland areas. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrent flood elevation may be used to approximate the bankful stage.

Basement.
That portion of a building which has less than one-half of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average elevation of the adjoining grade.

Base station.
A structure that supports or houses an existing antenna, auxiliary support equipment, transceiver, or other associated equipment, encompassing such equipment in any technological configuration, which has been reviewed and approved under applicable codes. Base station does not include support towers or any equipment associated with a support tower.

Bed and breakfast inn.
Any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence and structures appurtenant thereto, regardless of whether the owner or operator of the establishment resides in any of the structures, that:

1.

Has more than two rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public; and

2.

Offers a breakfast meal as part of the cost of the room.

Berm.
A small rise or hill in a landscape which is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas.

Bikeway/bicycle facility.
There are different types of bicycle facilities. In general, a "bicycle facility" is a public or private way designed for and dedicated to bicycle use. It may consist of a road, a lane within or on the shoulder of a road, a path, multi-use path, or other way that is specifically designated for bicycle travel or shared bicycle/pedestrian travel.

Block.
All of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way, and water features, but is not divided or separated in any way by streets or water features.

Block frontage.
All of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting public streets, or that is between a public street and a natural water feature, or end of a dead end street. An intercepting street determines the boundary of the block frontage only on the side of the street that it intercepts.

Bollard.
A post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles). Bollards may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

Buffer (wetland).
An area established adjacent to a significant wetland which protects the resource from impacts.

Building.
Any structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50% of the area of its sides, built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, motor vehicles, animals or personal or real property of any kind.

Building area.
The total area of a building, both above and below ground, measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Gross building area does not include the following:

1.

Roof area;

2.

Roof top mechanical equipment; and

3.

Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50% or more of their perimeter.

Building coverage.
See "lot coverage."

Building footprint.
The outline of a building, including any roofed structure. A roofed structure includes any structure more than six feet above grade at any point, and that provides an impervious cover over what is below. Building footprint also includes uncovered horizontal structures such as decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than six feet above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage. Underground facilities and structures are defined based on the foundation line.

Building frontage.
The front façade of a building facing a public or private street or an access drive of more than 200 feet in length.

Building height (or "structural height").
The height of a building or structure as measured from the elevation of the finished grade (see definition of "grade, finished") to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. This definition shall not apply to broadcast towers or antennae connected to or separate from any structure.

Building mass.
The aggregate size of a building.

Building limits.
A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

Building line.
A line running parallel to a lot line that is the same distance from the lot line as the closest portion of a building on the site.

Building Official.
The person who enforces the building ordinances and regulations for the City, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned.

Building pad.
A vacant building site on a lot with other building sites.

Building permit.
A permit for any structure, obtained in accordance with appropriate portions of the Uniform Building Code and any other applicable code, ordinance or statute.

Building scale.
The dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other buildings.

Building site.
The area on a lot or parcel that is designated to contain a structure, impervious surface or non-native landscaping.

Building square footage.
For purposes of computing lot frontage improvement requirements, building square footage means the total area of all floors of all buildings measured for each floor (including basements) from the exterior faces of any building or structure. Building square footage includes the area devoted to garages, storage and structured parking, including carports.

Build-to line.
A maximum front or street yard setback which is typically required along commercial street frontages to promote a storefront character and pedestrian-oriented design.

Bus stop.
A location where bus service stops to load and unload passengers. For purposes of measuring, the bus stop is the location of a sign denoting the bus stop.

Camouflaged.
Any wireless or communication facility that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of camouflaged facilities may include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas integrated into architectural elements, towers painted to match the ambient background colors, and employing similar techniques to minimize the visual impact of the facility.

Canopy.
A permanent roofed structure that may be freestanding or be partially attached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons on foot and/or in motor vehicles; does not include a completely enclosed structure.

Capacity.
Maximum holding or service ability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities.

Carport.
A stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, not more than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats.

Cemetery.
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated and approved for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.

Centerline radius.
The radius of a centerline of a street right-of-way.

Certificate of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of inspection issued by the City at the completion of a building permit or change of occupancy.

Change of use.
Change in the primary type of use on a site.

Child care home.
The utilization of a private residence as a certified child care home that has been certified under ORS 657A.280 by the Oregon Child Care Division.

City.
The City of Happy Valley, Oregon.

City Engineer.
The City Engineer for the City of Happy Valley is the professional engineer (P.E.) that holds the title of City Engineer, or the City Engineer's designee.

City Manager.
The City Manager or the City Manager's designee, except where the context expressly requires otherwise.

Clear and objective.
Decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

Clearing.
Any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of the site.

Collocation.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, the mounting or installation of antennas and/or auxiliary support equipment on an existing support tower, support structure, replacement structure or base station for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for wireless communication purposes, but not including installation of a replacement structure or a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the existing wireless communications facility, as defined below.

Commercial vehicles.
For the purposes of Title 16, commercial vehicles are defined as being designed or used primarily for the transportation of property for compensation or profit, and include dump trucks, tractor-trailers, large commercial trailers, larger tow trucks, flat-bed trucks, larger box vans, etc. The definition also includes vehicles designed to transport 16 or more persons and vehicles designed to transport hazardous materials regardless of weight. This definition excludes fire trucks, emergency vehicles, motor homes and recreational vehicles operated solely for personal use, as well as SUVs, oversized "pick-up" trucks (for example, F-350s, "dualies," etc., that may have a "T" plate commercial license but are less than 26,001 pounds gross vehicle weight (empty)).

Commission.
The Happy Valley Planning Commission as appointed by the City Council.

Common area.
Land commonly owned to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities (e.g., typically owned by a homeowners' association).

Common green.
A courtyard that provides for pedestrian and bicycle access, but not vehicle access, to abutting property and generally provides a common area for use by residents. A common green may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features may be included in a common green, such as groundcover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios, benches, or gazebos.

Comprehensive plan.
Those coordinated plans which have been adopted by the City of Happy Valley which designate plans and programs to encourage the most appropriate use of land and which outlines goals and policies and establishes guidelines which will guide development throughout the City in the interest of the public health, peace, safety and welfare.

Computations (drainage).
For the purposes of Chapter 16.51, calculations, including coefficients and other pertinent data, made to determine the drainage plan with flow rates of water given in cubic feet per second (cfs).

Conditional use.
A use that requires a conditional use permit and which may be allowed upon approval of the Planning Commission or appropriate and designated body or agent and subject to requirements, stipulations and conditions as stated by City ordinances which will insure the public health, safety, peace and general welfare of the community.

Condominium.
Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit structure that includes common areas and facilities.

Congregate housing.
Multi-unit housing with self-contained apartments that contain cooking facilities which support independent lifestyles for those that have life-function disabilities due to age, medical, or mental condition, which do not require residential care or skilled nursing services. Congregate housing provides varying levels of support services, such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, and social, recreation, cultural and education activities.

Conservation easement.
An easement that protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees or groves, floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources.

Constructed wetlands.
Wetlands developed as a water quality or quantity facility, subject to change and maintenance as such. These areas must be clearly defined and/or separated from naturally occurring or created wetlands.

Continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
An age-restricted development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care, from independent living to convalescence care and long-term skilled nursing care, and enters into contracts to provide lifelong care. A CCRC typically includes a full range of living arrangements from independent living, congregate housing, residential care and skilled nursing and sometimes hospice care. CCRCs provide a range of ancillary facilities and services such as health care, meals with common dining facilities, physical therapy, education, recreation, and other social and cultural activities.

Copy (sign).
For the purposes of Chapter 16.45, any written or graphic information on a sign.

Corner radius.
The radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement.

Cornice.
The projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof.

Council.
The elected members which constitute the governing body of the City, referred to as the City Council of Happy Valley, Oregon.

County.
Clackamas County, Oregon.

Courtyard.
A court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art.

Created wetland.
Wetlands developed in an area previously identified as a non-wetland to replace or mitigate wetland destruction or displacement. A created wetland shall be regulated and managed the same as an existing wetland.

Crown cover.
The area directly beneath the crown and within the drip line of a tree or shrub. The crown consists of the above ground branches, stems, and leaves.

Curb cut.
A driveway opening delineated by a concrete apron along a street.

Dangerous tree.
A tree which, due to its location or condition, presents a clear public safety hazard or an imminent danger of property damage, where such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment, pruning or other means.

Daycare facility/child care center/family child care.
Facilities that provide care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24 hours. Examples include daycare centers, nursery schools, preschools and before-and-after school care programs. Family child care providers provide care for not more than 12 children in a home. See ORS 657A for certification requirements.

Days.
Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

Debris.
For the purposes of Chapter 16.34, discarded manmade objects that would not occur in an undeveloped stream corridor or wetland. "Debris" includes, but is not limited to, tires, vehicles, litter, scrap metal, construction waste, lumber, plastic or styrofoam. Debris does not include objects necessary to a use allowed by this chapter, or ornamental and recreational structures. Debris does not include existing natural plant materials or natural plant materials which are left after flooding, downed or standing dead trees or trees which have fallen into protected water features.

Dedication.
The designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners' association.

Delineation.
In reference to natural resources, an analysis of a resource by a qualified professional that determines its boundary according to an approved methodology.

Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) water quality standards.
The numerical criteria or narrative condition needed in order to protect an identified beneficial use.

Design professional.
A person with at least a Masters degree in architecture or urban design with five years of professional experience.

Design flood elevation.
The elevation of the 100 year storm as defined in FEMA Flood Insurance Studies or, in areas without FEMA floodplains, the elevation of the 25 year storm, or the edge of mapped flood prone soils or similar methodologies.

Design storm.
The storm level which has been designated by the City as being the base storm for all computations and calculations.

Design storm frequency.
The average period of time in years that the design storm may be expected to occur once, with the probability being the same for each year that such storm will occur in any year of the frequency interval.

Develop.
To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including excavations and fills.

Developed land.
A parcel or parcels of land developed to the extent permitted by the current development regulations or minimum density requirements, if applicable.

Developed areas not providing vegetative cover.
Areas that lack sufficient vegetative cover to meet one-acre mapping units of any other type of vegetative cover.

Developed flood area.
A flood area (1) upon which a building or other structure has been located, or (2) that is an uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as "Grasscrete") that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses; provided, however, that graveled areas shall not be considered developed flood areas.

Development.
Generally, all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, impervious surface areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land. In addition, development means any manmade change defined as a change in use, mining, dredging, paving, filling or grading in amounts greater than 10 cubic yards on any lot or excavation, or any other activity that results in the removal of more than either: 10 percent of the vegetation in the water quality resource area or 20,000 square feet of the vegetation in the Habitat Conservation Area on a lot or parcel. When individual trees are removed, the area contained within the tree's dripline shall be the basis for calculating the square footage of vegetation removed. Development does not include the following: (1) Stream enhancement or restoration projects approved by cities and counties; (2) Farming practices as defined in ORS 30.930 and farm use as defined in ORS 215.203, except that buildings associated with farm practices and farm uses are subject to the requirements of this title; and (3) Construction on lots in subdivisions meeting the criteria of ORS 92.040(2)(1995). See also "exterior improvements."

Development agreement.
An agreement between the City and a property owner related to a specific development proposal in which the property owner and City agree in writing to on-site and off-site public or private improvements related to the subject development proposal, pursuant to ORS 94.504.

Development district.
The specific designations applied to all land throughout the entire City which serves to indicate the potential density of development.

Development site.
The development site is either or both of the following:

1.

A lot of record existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; or

2.

A tract of land either unsubdivided or consisting of two or more contiguous lots of record which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, was in single or common ownership.

Disabled Person.
For the purposes of this Code, a disabled person is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and state law.

Disabled person day care facility.
Facilities that provide care and supervision of disabled persons for periods of less than 24 hours.

Discontinued use.
A use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. A use is considered temporarily discontinued during the first two years after it ceases, after which it is considered permanently discontinued.

Discretionary.
A permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion.

Display surface area.
The total area of a sign that is available for displaying advertising or an informational message, subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.45.

Distribution center.
An establishment engaged in receiving, storing and distributing goods, products, cargo, and materials, including transshipment by rail, air, or motor vehicle.

District, land use.
As used in this code, a land use district is the same as a zoning district or zone.

District, lighting.
Clackamas County Service District No. 5 or its successor.

Disturb.
Manmade changes to the existing physical status of the land, which are made in connection with development. The following uses are excluded from the definition:

1.

Enhancement or restoration of the water quality resource area;

2.

Planting native cover identified in the Native Plants section of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

Disturbance area.
An area that contains all temporary and permanent development, exterior improvements, and staging and storage areas on the site, both existing and proposed. Vegetation planted for resource enhancement and agricultural and pasture land is not included.

Division of State Lands Wetland Determinations.
As defined in OAR 141-86-200 (1997) (definitions for Local Wetland Inventory Standards and Guidelines), "wetland determination" means identifying an area as wetland or non-wetland.

Drainage area.
The watershed (acreage) contributing surface water runoff to and including the subject property.

Drainage plan.
A plan for receiving, handling, and transporting surface water within and releasing the flow of water from the subject property.

Drainageway.
Generally, an open linear depression, whether constructed or natural, that functions for the collection and drainage of surface water. It may be permanently or temporarily inundated.

1.

Major drainageway. Drainageways which, for the purpose of Chapter 16.51, are the primary water-carrying routes within the City. The major drainageways shall include Mt. Scott Creek and the natural drainageway that is tributary to Mt. Scott Creek, located immediately to the west of Mt. Scott Blvd.

2.

Minor drainageway. Drainageways which are secondary water-carrying routes within the City and shall include all other natural drainageways as indicated on the current Happy Valley drainage study.

Drip-line.
Imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

Drive aisle.
An internal vehicular drive within an, institutional, multifamily residential, commercial or industrial complex parking lot, typically bordered by parking spaces.

Drive-through/drive-up facility.
A facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through/drive-up facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually either perform the service for themselves, or wait on the site for the service to be rendered. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows; automatic teller machines; coffee kiosks and similar vendors; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters.

Driveway.
There are two types of driveways:

1.

The area that provides vehicular access to a site from a street. A driveway is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb cut. This type of driveway begins at the street and extends into the site. A driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas, such as aisles; and

2.

The area that provides vehicular circulation between two or more noncontiguous parking areas. A driveway does not include maneuvering or circulation areas within the interior of a parking area. Where required by Code for fire safety, a driveway must be used exclusively for circulation, with no abutting parking spaces.

Driveway apron/approach.
The edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way; usually constructed of concrete.

Drought-tolerant/drought-resistant plants or xeriscaping.
As listed and described in the Sunset Western Garden Book or similar information source for the area in which the development site is located (latest edition).

Dwelling (dwelling unit).
A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

Dwelling, attached duplex.
A duplex located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with another duplex (for a total of four dwelling units). The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least 50% of the length of the side of the dwelling.

Dwelling, cottage cluster.
A grouping of no less than four detached buildings per gross acre on a lot designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of separate families living independently of each other in each detached building, or "cottage," and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family. The cottages are generally oriented around a common courtyard and comply with the LDC 16.44.130.

Dwelling, four-family (quadplex).
A building containing four dwelling units on a single lot. The units must comply with the definition of an attached structure and share a common wall of at least 20 feet in width or common floor/ceiling of at least 20 feet in width. None of the units may be attached by hallways, storage areas, breezeways, "I" beams, roofs, decks or stairways or contain an accessory dwelling unit.

Dwelling, multiple-family (multifamily).
A building on a single lot designed and used for occupancy by five or more families, all living independently of each other, and having separate housekeeping facilities for each family. Multifamily does not include cottage cluster housing. Multifamily dwellings include condominiums and apartment units without regard to ownership status. Ancillary uses associated with residential development and within the same tenant space as the residential use such as lobbies, day care, passenger loading, community rooms, exercise facilities, offices, activity spaces or live-work spaces are considered part of the residential use.

Dwelling, multifamily—Senior housing.
Housing designated and/or managed for persons over a specified age. Specific age restrictions vary. Includes independent care and assisted care facilities for the elderly, but excludes nursing homes, convalescent care and institutional type living arrangements unless it is part of a congregate/assisted-living complex, and the congregate care portion does not make up more than 25% of the total gross area of the facility. Senior housing can consist of a combination of apartments, rowhouses and other types of housing units. Units may be connected to each other by hallways or breezeways. Ancillary uses associated with residential development and within the same tenant space as the residential use such as lobbies, day care, passenger loading, community rooms, exercise facilities, offices, activity spaces or live-work spaces are considered part of the residential use.

Dwelling, single-family attached (townhouse or rowhouse).
A dwelling, located on its own lot excluding an accessory dwelling unit, which shares one or more common or abutting walls of at least 20 feet in width with one or more other dwellings on another lot. A single-family attached dwelling does not share common floors or ceiling with other dwellings.

Dwelling, single-family detached (house).
A detached dwelling on a single lot excluding an accessory dwelling unit.

Dwelling, studio.
A dwelling unit where all permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking are contained in a single room.

Dwelling, three-family (triplex).
A building containing three dwelling units on a single lot. The units must comply with the definition of an attached structure and share a common wall of at least 20 feet in width or common floor/ceiling of at least 20 feet in width. None of the units may be attached by hallways, storage areas, breezeways, "I" beams, roofs, decks or stairways or contain an accessory dwelling unit.

Dwelling, two-family (duplex).
A building containing two dwelling units on one lot. The units must comply with the definition of an attached structure and share a common wall of at least 20 feet in width or common floor/ceiling of at least 20 feet in width. None of the units may be attached by hallways, storage areas, breezeways, "I" beams, roofs, decks or stairways or contain an accessory dwelling unit.

Easement.
A grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner's land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities. Recorded and on record at Clackamas County.

Eave.
Projecting overhang at the lower border of a roof and extending from a primary wall or support.

Ecological functions.
The primary biological and hydrologic characteristics of healthy fish and wildlife habitat. Riparian ecological functions include microclimate and shade, streamflow moderation and water storage, bank stabilization and sediment/pollution control, sources of large woody debris and natural channel dynamics, and organic material sources. Upland wildlife ecological functions include size of habitat area, amount of habitat with interior conditions, connectivity of habitat to water resources, connectivity to other habitat areas, and presence of unique habitat types.

Effective impervious area.
A subset of total impervious area that is hydrologically connected via sheet flow or discrete conveyance to a drainage system or receiving body of water.

Elevation, architectural.
Scaled drawing of the outside wall of a building or structure, from grade to roof ridgeline, typically specifying materials, color, and dimensions.

Emergency.
Any manmade or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material, contamination, utility or transportation disruptions, and disease.

Energy dissipators.
For the purposes of Chapter 16.51, natural or artificial objects, structures or systems which serve to reduce flow velocity or volume in any drainage or runoff area in order to prevent erosion, channelization or the increase of flow beyond desired levels.

Engineer.
A registered professional engineer licensed by the State of Oregon.

Engineering geologist.
A registered professional engineering geologist licensed by the State of Oregon.

Enhancement.
For the purposes of Chapter 16.34, the process of improving upon the natural functions and/or values of an area or feature which has been degraded by human activity. Enhancement activities may or may not return the site to a pre-disturbance condition, but create/recreate processes and features that occur naturally.

Equipment enclosure.
In reference to wireless communications facilities, a small structure, shelter, cabinet, box or vault designed for and used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary and/or desirable for processing wireless communications signals and data, including any provisions for air conditioning, ventilation or auxiliary electricity generators.

Erect or erected.
To construct, build, assemble, alter, place, affix, attach, create, recreate, paint, draw or in any way bring into being or establish.

Erosion.
The movement of soil particles resulting from actions of water or wind.

Evidence.
Application materials, plans, data, testimony and other factual information used to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with a code standard or criterion.

Excavating or filling.
The removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar nondecomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and stockpiling.

Expressway.
Expressways are complete routes or segments of multi-lane highways and planned multi-lane highways that provide for safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movements. The primary function is to provide for interurban travel and connections to high growth and existing and planned employment areas with minimal interruptions. A secondary function is to provide for long distance interurban travel in metropolitan areas. Speeds are moderate to high. Private access is discouraged and there is either a long-range plan or review process to identify alternative access. Public road connections are highly controlled and parking is prohibited. Pedestrian facilities and bikeways may be separated from the roadway.

Exterior display.
Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Exterior display does not include goods that are being stored or parked outside, if there is no variety or distinction among the goods, and the goods are not examined and compared by customers. It does not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. Exterior display does not include car and boat sales and leasing when such vehicles are not accessible to customers to inspect and compare; this situation is considered exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales and leasing, and plant nurseries. See also "exterior work activities" and "exterior storage."

Exterior alteration.
An alteration that is outside any buildings.

Exterior storage.
Exterior storage includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage also includes the outdoor storage of goods for sale, lease or rent that may be differentiated by type or model, but that are not accessible for customers to inspect or compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; vehicles that are for sale, lease or rent, which are not accessible to the customer to inspect or compare; vehicles that have been unloaded at port facilities and are waiting transport to off-site locations; vehicles that have been towed and are being kept in an impound lot; and other similar items. The storage of recreational vehicles outdoors is also considered exterior storage. Damaged or inoperable vehicles, or vehicles that have missing parts, which are kept outside are also included as exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior storage are lumber yards, wrecking yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, car dealerships or car rental establishments, and port facilities. See also "exterior display" and "exterior work activities."

Exterior work activities.
Exterior work activities include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. See "exterior display" and "exterior storage."

Facilities, wireless communication.
All equipment and property associated with the construction of antenna support structures, antenna arrays and antennas, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas of all descriptions, electronic and mechanical equipment and devices, and buildings and similar structures.

Family.
See "household."

Farming or farm use.
As used in this Code, "agriculture" is the same as "farm use." (See ORS 215.203(2)(a).) Includes utilization of land to raise, harvest, or sell crops; feed, breed, manage, and sell live-stock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, honeybees, or their produce; dairy and sell dairy products; or any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, timber agricultural use, or combination thereof. Farm uses include preparation or processing and storage of products raised on such land, but do not include construction or use of dwellings and other buildings customarily provided in conjunction with farm uses.

Fence and fencing.
Any barrier or section thereof, other than a wall or vegetation unless otherwise identified, designed to delimit a boundary or provide a visual screen.

Fence, sight-obscuring.
A structure, consisting of wood, metal or masonry or an evergreen hedge or other evergreen planting, built for the purpose of separating properties and/or uses and arranged in such a way as to obstruct normal human vision.

Fill.
Any material such as, but not limited to, earth, sand, gravel, soil, rock, and similar non-decomposable material that is used for the purposes of development or redevelopment. "Filling" is the placement or replacement of these materials.

Final plat.
The diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions and information concerning a land division, approved and prepared for filing or recording with County clerk and containing those elements and requirements as set forth in this title, and as required by state statute.

Fire apparatus lane or fire lane.
Unobstructed area or driveway meeting Uniform Fire Code requirements; typically may not be used for parking or loading area.

Flood or flooding.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or, mudslides (i.e. mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. In addition, flooding means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
An official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

Floodplain or flood-prone area.
The land area identified and designated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Oregon Division of State Lands, FEMA or the City as susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flood or flooding").

Floodway.
The active flowing channel during a flood, as designated on flood maps for the City; the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

Floodway fringe.
The area of the floodplain, lying outside the floodway, which does not contribute appreciably to the passage of floodwater, but serves as a retention area.

Floor area.
The total floor area of a building, both above and below ground with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet. Floor area is measured from the interior walls of a building or structure and does not include the following:

1.

Roof area;

2.

Roof top mechanical equipment;

3.

Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50% or more of their perimeter; and

4.

Vents, shafts, courtyards, stairwells, elevator shafts, rooms designed and used for the purpose of storage and operations of maintenance equipment and enclosed or covered parking areas.

Floor area ratio.
The ratio of the total amount of enclosed gross floor area within a structure to the amount of buildable acreage pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F), Density Calculations. For example, a single-story building constructed on one-quarter of the net developable site would have a floor area ratio of 0.25. If a second story were added, the floor area ratio would increase to 0.50, etc. For purposes of calculation, both floor area and net site area shall be converted to square feet. Total gross floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure, and does not include basement or semi-subterranean areas used for storage or parking.

Foot-candle.
A unit of illumination (light standards), equal to one lumen per square foot, or the amount of light from a source of one candela directly thrown on a square foot of surface at a distance of one foot.

Forest canopy.
Areas that are part of a contiguous grove of trees of one acre or larger in area with approximately 60% or greater crown closure, irrespective of whether the entire grove is within 200 feet of the relevant water feature.

Front of structure.
The portion of building parallel or adjacent to the front property line, or the side on which the front door of the building is located.

Front property line.
Any boundary line separating the lot from a public or private road.

Frontage.
Generally, the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street. However, for the purposes of Section 16.42.070, "frontage" specifically means the length of property abutting a street benefited by street lighting.

Frontage street or road.
A minor street that parallels an arterial street or highway in order to provide access to abutting properties and minimize direct access onto the arterial or highway.

Functional classification.
The classification given to streets by the road authority (e. g., "local/collector/arterial"). See Chapter 16.41 and the City's Transportation System Plan for street standards.

Future division plan or future development plan.
A document that shows lot, tract and right-of-way boundaries for all potential future phases of a land division. The plan is not binding on the City or the applicant. The purpose of the plan is to document that the design of the first phase of the plan does not preclude future phases from meeting City standards.

Garage.
A covered structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, mobile homes, or houseboats. Carports are considered garages. Floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-to-ceiling walls, is considered part of the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure. See also "structured parking."

Glare.
The effect of brightness or brightness difference within the visual field sufficiently high to cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance.

Grade, finished.
The elevation or surface of the earth after all earthwork has been completed as approved on the final grading plan for the subject site (also finish grade). In the calculating of building height, finished grade is measured at the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and property line, or when the property line is greater than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building. The City Engineer shall have authority to further define finished grade when unusual conditions pertaining to structures and terrain exist.

Grade, natural.
The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

Grading.
All cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated with development.

Ground cover.
Any living plant approved as part of a landscape plan that provides under story cover, shade of the ground, or cover for bare ground. See Chapter 16.42, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

Habitat Conservation Area (HCA).
An area identified on the Metro Habitat Conservation Areas Map and subject to specific development standards.

Habitat-friendly development.
A method of developing property that has less detrimental impact on fish and wildlife habitat than does traditional development methods. Examples include clustering development to avoid habitat, using alternative materials and designs such as pier, post, or piling foundations designed to minimize tree root disturbance, managing stormwater on-site to help filter rainwater and recharge groundwater sources, collecting rooftop water in rain barrels for reuse in site landscaping and gardening, and reducing the amount of effective impervious surface created by development.

Hardscape. Hard-surfaced areas.
Such areas include specially treated or textured concrete designed as a plaza, courtyard or building entrance and contain pedestrian sensitive amenities such as benches, drinking fountains, planters, trees in grated wells, street furniture, lighting, public art, water features or other design features integrated into the overall design of a building or portion of a site. Hardscaped areas may include canopies and overhangs to protect public activities from wet weather.

Hazardous substances.
Any substance, material, or waste listed below:

1.

Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste;

2.

Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986, published July, 1987, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency; and

3.

Hazardous Materials Table, in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101.

Helicopter landing pad (helipad).
A helipad is a relatively flat land area or landing platform for helicopters constructed of concrete or fabricated hard surface, marked with a circle and/or the letter "H" so as to be visible from the air.

Heliport.
A heliport is a small airport suitable only for helicopters that contains one or more helipads and may have limited facilities such as fuel, equipment storage, lighting, a windsock, or a hangar.

Home occupation, home occupation site.
A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the residential use on the site, subject to the provisions of Chapter 16.22 (Residential Land Use Districts) and Section 16.69.020 (Home Occupation Permits).

Hotel/motel.
A building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy of transient individuals lodged with or without meals. (See ORS 446.310.)

House.
See "Dwelling, single-family detached." A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

Household.
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; one or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; or seven or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct domestic character, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond where each party is responsible for the basic material needs of the other and all are living as a single housekeeping unit.

Identified natural features (e.g., wetlands or streams).
Natural features that are identified in the National Wetlands Inventory, Local Wetlands Inventory, and other references used by the City or natural resource regulatory agency, as being significant and in need of protection.

Impervious surface.
That surface area which prevents or slows the entry of water into the soil mantle and/or causes water to runoff the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate. Impervious surfaces may include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots, oiled macadam, gravel or other surfaces which similarly resist infiltration or absorption of moisture.

Incidental and subordinate to.
Secondary to, and less apparent than, the primary use or other portion of the development.

Infill.
The development or division of vacant, bypassed lands located in an area that is mainly developed.

Interior alteration.
An alteration that is inside any buildings.

Invasive non-native or noxious vegetation.
Plant species that have been introduced and due to aggressive growth patterns and lack of natural enemies in the area where introduced, spread rapidly into native plant communities (see definition for "nuisance/non-native invasive plants").

Junk yard.
(1) Any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap or waste materials. (2) Any establishment or place of business on which one or more inoperable motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of waste or refuse are maintained, stored, bought, or sold. Includes wrecking yards, automobile grave yards, garbage dumps, and scrap metal processing facilities.

Kennel.
Any location where five or more dogs or cats aged six months or older are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.

Land Development Code or LDC.
Happy Valley's Land Development Code, as amended.

Land division.
The process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. See Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

Land use.
The activity or activities that occur on a piece of land. Activities may be individually identified as primary or accessory uses.

Land use approval.
A land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.

Land use review.
An application for land use approval pursuant to this title, or the review of such application.

Landing (stairs).
A level part of a staircase, usually at the end of a flight of stairs.

Landscaping.
Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative groundcover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as fences, benches, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of trees.

Lane, mid-block.
A narrow, limited use roadway facility, similar to an alley in design, usually used to access a limited number of dwelling units.

Legislative.
A legislative action or decision is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e.g., adoption of, or amendment to, a Comprehensive Plan or development regulation). See also Section 16.61.050 (Type IV Procedure).

Level 1 Services.
As referred to throughout the City's Comprehensive Plan and within the Land Development Code, means the required provision by a development of public water, public sewer, stormwater, fire protection and streets and roads unless meeting the criteria as a private facility or an alternative is approved per the LDC.

Level 2 Services.
As referred to throughout the City's Comprehensive Plan and within the Land Development Code, means the required provision by agencies and/or development to the provision of public schools, police protection, parks and recreation, public transit, vector control and administrative services.

Level of service ("LOS").
A quantitative standard for transportation facilities describing operational conditions. Level of service may be described for intersections (signalized or unsignalized) or street segments (between signalized intersections).

Limbing.
The removal of a branch of a tree back to the main trunk of such tree.

Livestock.
Domestic animal types customarily raised or kept on farms. See "agriculture."

Living area.
The habitable floor area of a residential structure conforming to applicable building codes; typically does not include garage area, and attic and basement areas with substandard ceiling height or substandard egress.

Loading area.
The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles. See also Chapter 16.43, Parking and Loading.

Local Improvement District ("LID").
A small public district formed for the purpose of carrying out local improvements (paving of streets, construction of storm sewers, development of a park, etc.). Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance with ORS 223.387-223.485.

Lot.
The State of Oregon defines lot as a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a subdivision. For purposes of Title 16, the definitions for "lot" apply to the State definition of both lot (result of subdividing) and parcel (result of partitioning). See also "ownership," "parcel" and "site."

Lot area.
The total surface area (measured horizontally) within the boundary lines of a lot.

Lot, corner.
See "lot types."

Lot coverage.
The portion of a lot that is covered by buildings, and decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than 30 inches above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage.

Lot depth.
The distance of a line measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. For the purposes of measuring lot depth of corner lots, the longest streetside lot line may be assumed to be a side lot line.

Lot frontage.
See "frontage."

Lot line adjustment.
The relocation of a single common property line between two abutting properties, in conformance with ORS 92.010(11).

Lot line, front.
Front lot line is a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line. On a through lot the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line and which lot line is to be the rear lot line, regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. On a flag lot, the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line, so long as it is one of the lot lines that makes up the flag portion of the lot, and the rear lot line is the property line most distant from, and opposite from, the chosen front lot line.

Lot line, rear.
The property line most distant from, and opposite from, the front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line.

Lot line, side.
A lot line that connects front and rear lot lines. On a corner lot, the longer lot line that abuts a street is a side lot line.

Lot line, street.
A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines.

Lot of record.

1.
"Lot of record"
means an area of land created prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title as shown as a lot on a final plat of a recorded subdivision; or

2.

An area of land described by metes and bounds in a deed or contract recorded in the office of the County Clerk prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; the creation of which was not in violation of any state statute or City ordinance.

Lot types.

1.
Corner lot.
A lot bounded entirely by streets, or a lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two or more streets and which the interior angle formed by the extensions of the street lines in the direction which they take at their intersections with lot lines other than street lines, forms an angle of 135 degrees or less. In the event that any street line is a curve at its point of intersection with a lot line other than street line, the tangent to the curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street line.

2.
Interior lot.
A lot other than a corner lot with frontage only on one street.

3.
Through lot.
A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots with frontage on two streets may be referred to as "double-frontage" lots.

4.
Flag lot.
A lot with two distinct parts:

a.

The flag, which is the only building site and is located behind another lot; and

b.

The pole, which connects the flag to the street, provides the only street frontage for the lot, and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone.

5.
Cul-de-sac lot.
A lot which is basically triangular in shape and has a front lot line contiguous with the outer radius of a curve. Such lots shall have a minimum frontage as specified in the particular district. The calculation of lot width shall be made by measuring width at the midpoints of side lot lines.

6.
Lot, double-frontage.
A lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

Lot width.
The perpendicular distance measured between the midpoints of the two principal opposite side lot lines and generally at approximately right angles to the lot depth. For the purposes of width of lot measurements on corner lots, the longest street lot line may be assumed to be a side lot line.

Low impact development.
Minimizing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater through natural processes and maintaining pre-development hydrologic characteristics, such as flow patterns, surface retention, and recharge rates.

Low structure vegetation.
Areas that are part of a contiguous area one acre or larger in size comprised of grass, meadow, crop-lands, or areas of open soils located within 300 feet of a surface stream (low structure vegetation areas may include areas of shrub vegetation less than one acre in size if they are contiguous with areas of grass, meadow, crop-lands, orchards, Christmas tree farms, holly farms, or areas of open soils located within 300 feet of a surface stream and together form an area of one acre in size or larger).

Luminaire.
A complete lighting device consisting of a light source together with its direct appurtenances, such as globe, reflector, refractor, housing and such support as is integral with the housing. The pole, post or bracket is not considered a part of the luminaire.

Main/primary building entrance.
A main entrance is the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, each building has one main entrance. Main entrances are the widest entrance of those provided for use by pedestrians. In multi-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into the building's lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multi-tenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant's outside entrance is a main entrance. In single-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into lobby, reception, or sales areas.

Maintenance.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, emergency or routine repairs or replacement of transmitters, antennas, or other components of previously approved wireless communication facilities which do not create a substantial change in the physical dimensions.

Major transit stop.
Transit centers and major bus stops that are identified as part of the regional transit system, as depicted in the Happy Valley Transportation System Plan (TSP) Transit Plan.

Maneuvering area/aisle.
The driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking or loading spaces.

Manufactured dwelling park/manufactured home park.
Any place where four or more manufactured homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. "Manufactured dwelling park" does not include a lot or lots located within an approved subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot. See also ORS Chapter 446.

Manufactured home.
A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more sections at a location other than the home site by assembly line-type production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process. A manufactured home is a mobile home constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code) in effect after June 15, 1976. NOTE: A mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code), in effect after June 15, 1976 is a "residential trailer." (See definition of "mobile home" and Chapter 16.44, Special Standards for Certain Uses.)

Manufactured home accessory building or structure.
Any awning, portable, demountable or permanent cabana, carport, porch, skirting or steps established for use of the occupant of the manufactured home and which are designed or intended to be attached to and which depend, in whole or in part, upon the manufactured home for structural support.

Marijuana.
The plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes 571.300.

Marijuana items.
Marijuana, cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, and cannabinoid extracts.

Marijuana processing.
The processing, compounding, or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, or cannabinoid extracts, provided that the marijuana processor is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

Marijuana production.
The manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing, trimming, harvesting, or drying of marijuana, provided that the marijuana producer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, or registered with the Oregon Health Authority and a "person designated to produce marijuana by a registry identification cardholder."

Marijuana retailing.
The sale of marijuana items to a consumer, provided that the marijuana retailer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

Marijuana wholesaling.
The purchase of marijuana items for resale to a person other than a consumer, provided that the marijuana wholesaler is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

Marquee.
A projecting, permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported only by a building.

Master plan.
A plan for a defined geographic area in single or multiple ownership that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and includes, but is not limited to, a land use plan, a circulation plan, an open space plan, a utilities plan and a program of implementation measures and other mechanisms needed to carry out the plan. The plan shall be created through the master plan process outlined in this Land Development Code.

Medical center.
An inpatient hospital and supporting emergency outpatient and related ancillary services to the sick and infirm, which is usually developed in a campus setting. Accessory uses may include diagnostic and treatment facilities; laboratories and surgical suites; kitchen/food service facilities; laundry, housekeeping and maintenance facilities; short-term lodging for patients and families; administrative offices and parking. Medical centers may also include freestanding offices for hospital-based and/or private-practice physicians and other allied health care professionals.

Middle housing.
Means duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, cottage clusters and townhouses.

Middle housing child lot.
A unit of land created from the division of a middle housing parent lot through a middle housing land division.

Middle housing land division.
A partition or subdivision of a lot or parcel on which the development of middle housing is allowed under ORS 197.758(2) and the partition or subdivision is processed in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapter 92 and LDC 16.61.070. The lot or parcel that is the subject of the land division is referred to as the middle housing parent lot; a lot created by the division is referred to as a middle housing child lot.

Middle housing parent lot.
A lot or parcel that is developed, or proposed to be developed, with middle housing, and which may therefore be further divided through a middle housing land division to create middle housing child lots.

Mitigation.
The reduction of adverse effects of a proposed project by considering in this order: (1) avoiding the impact all together by not taking a certain action or parts of an action; (2) minimizing impacts by limiting the degree or magnitude of the action and its implementation; (3) rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating or restoring the affected environment; (4) reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance operations during the life of the action by monitoring and taking appropriate measures; and (5) compensating for the impact by replacing or providing comparable substitute resource areas (e.g., water quality resource areas or habitat conservation areas).

Mixed use area or center.
An area designed to encourage a diversity of compatible and supporting land uses which may include a mixture of residential, retail, commercial, office or other miscellaneous uses.

Mixed use building.
A building supporting land uses which includes a mixture of residential, retail, commercial, office or other miscellaneous uses.

Mobile food unit.
Per Oregon Administrative Rule 333-150-0000, "mobile food unit" means any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer. Also referred to as a "food cart."

Mobile home.
A dwelling unit constructed off of the site and which is not constructed to the standards of the Uniform Building Code. Mobile homes include residential trailers and manufactured homes.

Mobile home park.
Two or more mobile homes that are located on a single site for 30 days or more and intended for residential use. Mobile home park does not include sites where unoccupied mobile homes are offered for sale or lease. See also "recreational vehicle park."

Mobile home space.
The area occupied by a mobile home and its accessory uses and structures in a mobile home park.

Modular housing.
See "prefabricated house or assembly."

Model home.
A structure constructed as and intended to be occupied as a residential dwelling unit that is temporarily used as an example of the type of residential dwelling units to be constructed in a subdivision, is open to the public for that purpose and may include a real estate sales office. A model home is a temporary nonresidential use and may not be used as a real estate sales office except in conjunction with the sale of lots and homes in the residential subdivision in which it is located.

Modification.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a change or alteration to an existing wireless communications facility or collocation on a base station, including, but not limited to, the addition, removal and/or replacement of antennas and/or auxiliary support equipment.

Motor home.
Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also "truck."

Motor vehicle.
Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, except all terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, snow mobiles, and similar vehicles that are not allowed on streets.

Mounting height.
For the purposes of Section 16.42.070, the vertical distance between the roadway surface and the center of the apparent light source of the luminaire.

Multi-use path.
An eight to 10 foot wide improved, all-weather surface pathway that is utilized for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Multi-use paths are typically located within public easements or rights-of-way, and may include the installation of removable bollards to prevent use by unauthorized motor vehicles. Private multi-use paths are required to be maintained by a homeowner's association or equivalent maintenance organization.

Native vegetation.
Any vegetation native to the Portland metropolitan area, listed on the Native Plants section of the City of Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

Natural area.
An area of and improved, preserved and maintained as a native ecosystem for the benefit of natural systems and fish and wildlife habitat.

Natural hazard.
Natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, and areas prone to landslides, floodways and floodplains.

Natural materials.
Wood, stone, brick and rock or any combination thereof.

Natural resource.
Those significant natural riparian, wildlife, and wetland resources and water quality resources that are protected by the Natural Resources Overlay Zone (see Chapter 16.34).

Neighborhood.
A residential area usually having distinguishing character or geography.

Neighborhood character.
Those unique attributes including, but not limited to, architecture, historical and cultural features, development patterns, landscape, hardscape and the size, scale and spacing of buildings and other structures that define a neighborhood's identity.

Net acre.
One acre of developable land, as calculated pursuant to Section 16.63.020(F), density calculations.

Nonconforming development.
An element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking area, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development standards. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

Nonconforming residential density.
A residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone. See Chapter 16.72 Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

Nonconforming situation.
A Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, or Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also "nonconforming residential density," "nonconforming development," and "nonconforming use." See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

Nonconforming Use.
A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone. See Chapter 16.72, Nonconforming Uses and Developments.

Nuisance/non-native invasive plants.
Plants which are listed in the Nuisance and Prohibited Plants sections of the Happy Valley Plant List (Appendix A).

ODFW construction standards.
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife construction guidelines for building roads, bridges and culverts or any transportation structure within a waterway.

Off-site.
Any area not located within the property to be developed, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for development approval.

Off-street parking.
All off-street areas designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles. See Chapter 16.43 for parking standards.

On-street parking.
Parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays. Parking may be parallel or angled in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb. See Chapter 16.43 for parking standards.

Open space.
Land that is undeveloped and that is planned to remain so. The term encompasses parks, forests and farmland. It may also refer only to land zoned as being available to the public, including playgrounds, watershed preserves and parks or to those lands within a subdivision or PUD, or separate from all other properties which have been dedicated in common to the ownership within the subdivision/PUD or to the public specifically for the purpose of providing places for fish and wildlife habitat preservation, scenic and/or recreational uses.

Optimal tree protection zone.
An area around a tree that must be protected to ensure that the tree is not physically damaged, and that the roots are protected.

Ordinary mean high water line.
Defined in OAR 141-82-005 means the line on the bank or shore to which water ordinarily rises in season; synonymous with mean high water (ORS 274.005).

Ordinary mean low water line.
Defined in OAR 141-82-005 means the line on the bank or shore to which water ordinarily recedes in season; synonymous with mean low water (ORS 274.005).

Orientation.
To cause to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., "a building oriented to the street").

Original structure.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a lawfully placed utility structure located in the right-of-way as of the effective date of the right-of-way use agreement between the owner and the City.

Outdoor commercial use.
A use supporting a commercial activity that provides goods or services, either wholesale or retail, where the amount of site area used for outdoor storage of materials or display of merchandise exceeds the total floor area of all buildings on the site. Examples of outdoor commercial uses include automobile sales or services, nurseries, lumber yards and equipment rental businesses.

Outdoor living area.
An outdoor or semi-outdoor area designed to provide a more pleasant and healthful environment for the occupants of a dwelling unit and the neighborhood in which such dwelling unit is located. It includes natural ground areas, gardens, landscaped areas, balconies, porches, patios, terraces, verandas, outdoor swimming pools, play areas, tennis courts, walkways and ties. Outdoor living areas do not include accessways, parking and loading areas, strips between buildings less than 10 feet in width, storage areas, and other areas not usable for outdoor activities.

Overlay zone/district.
Overlay zones impose and/or relax requirements of an underlying land use district, or base zone, where characteristics of the land or neighborhood, or the types of development planned for an area, require special regulations.

Owner.
The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.

Ownership.
An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a right-of-way. See also "lot" and "site."

Parcel.
A legally defined area of land created through a partition. See "lot."

Parking area.
A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading. See also "driveway," "garage," "structured parking," and "vehicle areas."

Parking lot perimeter.
The boundary of a parking lot area that usually contains a landscaped buffer area.

Parking space.
A permanently maintained space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle pursuant to the applicable parking standards (see Chapter 16.43, Parking and Loading).

Partition.
To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. (See ORS 92. 010(8).)

Passenger vehicle.
A motor vehicle designed to carry ten persons or less including the driver. Passenger vehicles are passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles as defined by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. See also "recreational vehicle" and "truck."

Paved area.
An uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as porous concrete or pavers) that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas but are typically impervious.

Peak discharge.
The maximum surface water runoff rate in cubic feet per second (cfs) determined for the design storm frequency.

Pedestrian amenity(ies).
Areas and objects that serve as places for public socializing and enjoyment and are usually closed to motorized vehicles. Examples include plazas, building frontage areas (extra-wide sidewalks), street furnishings (e.g., benches, drinking fountains, bus waiting shelters), and pocket parks adjacent to a street, and similar areas and objects. Sidewalks designed to meet the minimum sidewalk width standards under Chapter 16.41 are not "amenities" for the purpose of this title.

Pedestrian path.
A path that is utilized primarily for pedestrian access. (See Section 16.50.030(B)(8)(d).)

Pennant.
A sign that is a triangular flag which is tapered to a point or swallowtail.

Perennial streams.
All primary and secondary perennial waterways mapped by the U.S. Geological Survey.

Person.
Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company (LLC), syndicate, this and any other County, City and County, City, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

Phased development.
The partial development of any lands through the procedures contained in Section 16.62.040(D) or 16.63.040(E).

Planned unit development (PUD).
See Section 16.63.130 of this title. The development of a parcel or contiguous parcels or portions of such parcel or contiguous parcels, as individually subdivided lots; as an unsubdivided multiple unit development; or the clustering of units or lots where these methods allow a degree of latitude in the overall land use density and/or individual lot sizes for the preservation or enhancement of open space (or greenway), natural features and the objectives identified in Section 16.63.130.

Planning Official.
The Planning Official of the City of Happy Valley or the Planning Official's designee.

Planter strip.
A landscaped area of land generally located within the public right-of-way, between the street curb and the sidewalk.

Plat.
A map, either preliminary or final, which includes diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the State law definitions of "partition plat" and "subdivision plat." See also Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

Plaza.
An area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by pedestrians. See also "pedestrian amenities."

Post-construction erosion control.
Reestablishing groundcover or landscaping prior to the removal of temporary erosion control measures.

Practicable.
Available and capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology and logistics in light of the overall project purpose and probable impact on ecological functions. In regard to Habitat Conservation Areas (HCAs) the practicability of a development option shall include consideration of the type of HCA that will be affected by the proposed development. For example, High HCAs have been so designated because they are areas that have been identified as having lower urban development value and higher-valued habitat, so it should be more difficult to show that alternative development options that avoid the habitat are not practicable. On the other hand, Low HCAs have been so designated because they are areas that have been identified as having higher urban development value and lower-valued habitat, so it should be less difficult to show that alternative development options that avoid the habitat are not practicable.

Prefabricated house or assembly.
A house, portion of a house or structural unit, the integral parts of which have been built up or assembled prior to incorporation in the building or structure. These factory-built or modular units are designed and constructed to satisfy all provisions of the Uniform Building Code and other related codes.

Preliminary plan.
A clearly legible and approximate drawing of the proposed layout of streets, blocks, lots and other elements of a subdivision or partition which shall help furnish a basis for the Planning Commission's approval or disapproval of the general layout of the subdivision. For the purpose of this title the terms "preliminary" and "tentative," as used with state law, shall by synonymous, as will "plat" and "plan."

Premises.
A lot or number of lots on which are situated a business, or a building or group of buildings designed as a unit.

Primary structure.
A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

Primary use.
An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.

Project.
An existing or proposed use or development.

Property lines.
The property lines along the edge of a lot or site. See "lot line" (front, rear, interior side).

Protected water features.
Wetlands, rivers, natural lakes, streams, creeks, springs, and drainages.

Psilocybin.
As defined by the Oregon Health Authority.

Psilocybin processing.
The processing, compounding, or conversion of psilocybin into products, concentrates, or extracts, provided that the psilocybin processor licensed or registered by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and the Oregon Health Authority as required.

Psilocybin production.
The manufacture, extracting, planting, cultivation, growing, trimming, harvesting, or drying of psilocybin, provided that the psilocybin producer is licensed or registered by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and the Oregon Health Authority as required.

Psilocybin service center.
A premises licensed under ORS 475A.305.

Psilocybin wholesaling.
The purchase of psilocybin items for resale to a person other than a consumer, provided that the psilocybin wholesaler is licensed or registered by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission and the Oregon Health Authority as required.

Public access easement.
A public access easement is an easement granted to the public for all the purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not limited to, pedestrian and bicycle travel.

Public and semi-public buildings and uses.
A building or use, such as a church, school, auditorium, meeting hall, hospital, stadium, library, art gallery, museum, fire station or utility substation or use such as a park or playground or community center, owned or operated by a religious, fraternal, charitable or other nonprofit organization; a public utility; or any governmental agency.

Public improvements.
Development of public infrastructure, as required by the City, County, Special District, or Road Authority, as applicable. See Chapter 16.50.

Public safety facility.
A facility necessary to respond to an immediate hazard to the public health and safety, and that is owned, leased, or operated by the City of Happy Valley or other public agency or private utility. Public safety facilities include fire and police stations, flood control facilities, water towers and pump stations needed for emergency service, and emergency communication broadcast facilities. For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, public safety communication facilities are temporary wireless communications facilities that are deployed for emergency purposes and that will remain in use no longer than is needed to provide emergency service.

Qualified professional.
An individual who has proven expertise and vocational experience in a given field (e.g., natural resource biologist, geotechnical engineers, traffic engineers, etc.).

Quasi-judicial.
An action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this Code to the facts of a development proposal, and usually involves a public hearing. See Chapter 16.61 (Type III Review).

Rail right-of-way.
A public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.

Receiving bodies of water.
Creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds and other bodies of water into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or in manmade ditches or open systems.

Recreational area.
An area of land that is improved to create the opportunity for passive or active recreational activities. Passive recreational activities include but are not limited to walking, jogging, hiking, biking and picnicking. Active recreational activities include but are not limited to basketball, baseball, soccer, volleyball, tennis, use of playground equipment and other sports.

Recreational vehicle park.
A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks. See also "mobile home park."

Regional stormwater detention facility.
A pond, swale or underground system engineered to detain stormwater from more than one development according to the rules and regulations of the City and Clackamas County Water Environment Services.

Regional trail.
A 10 to 15 foot wide improved, all-weather surface pathway that is utilized for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Regional trails are typically located within public easements or rights-of-way, and may include the installation of removable bollards to prevent use by unauthorized motorized vehicles. Regional trails are required to be maintained by the local municipality or some circumstances, may be maintained by a homeowner's association or equivalent maintenance organization.

Registered family child care or disabled adult day care home.
"Licensed" means registered or certified. "Registration" means the document a family childcare or disabled adult daycare provider as issued by the state of Oregon to operate a family child care or disabled adult daycare home where care is provided in the family living quarters of the provider's home pursuant to ORS 329A.330 and OAR 414-205-0000 through 414-205-0170. Registration is limited to one provider at one address. "Certificate" means the document that is issued by the state of Oregon.

Removal of, or remove, a tree.
To cut down a tree, remove the crown or top of the tree, or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to decline and/or die. "Removal" includes, but is not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system by the application of toxic substances, the operation of equipment and vehicles, storage of materials, change of natural grade due to unapproved excavation or filling, or by the unapproved alteration of natural physical conditions. "Removal" does not include normal trimming or pruning of trees, but does include topping of trees.

Renovation plan.
A written proposal to restore the distinctive and historically authentic architectural, historical, or cultural character of a historic resource while retaining or establishing the possibility for efficient, contemporary use.

Replacement structure.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a utility structure that replaces a lawfully existing utility structure or support structure to accommodate wireless communication facilities and does not result in an increase in the total number of utility, guy, or support poles in the right-of-way or on private property.

Residence.
Same as "dwelling."

Residential facility/group care facility.
A residence for six to 15 physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of Residential Facility. Residential facilities may also include nursing homes, convalescent homes, and extended care facilities.

Residential home/group care home.
A residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of residential home.

Residential trailer.
A mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with Federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD Code), in effect after June 15, 1976. This definition includes the State definitions of residential trailers and mobile houses, as stated in Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) 446.

Restaurant, full service.
A restaurant where meals are principally served and eaten on premises, but services may also include take-out and food delivery.

Restaurants, drive-through.
A restaurant where food service is partially or principally provided via a drive-through window.

Restoration (natural resources).
For the purposes of Chapters 16.34 and 16.35, the process of returning a disturbed or altered area or feature to a previously existing natural condition. Restoration activities reestablish the structure, function and/or diversity to that which existed prior to impacts caused by human activity.

Revegetation.
The replacement of vegetation which was existing on any site prior to any work done and displayed by such work. Revegetation may be done by seeding the prepared ground surface or the actual planting of healthy seedlings, saplings or other vegetation of a quality which is equal to or in excess of the quality of the displaced vegetation.

Review body.
The person or group that is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review bodies in the City of Happy Valley include the Planning Official, Hearings Officer, Planning Commission, Design Review Board and the City Council.

Ridge line (building).
The top of a roof at its highest elevation.

Right-of-way.
An area that allows for the passage of people or vehicles. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, pedestrian connections, alleys, and all streets. A right-of-way may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency, or it may be privately owned. A right-of-way that is not dedicated or deeded to the public will be in a tract. Right-of-way also includes the space upon, above, below, in, along, across, over, or under public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or city owned property not generally open to the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City's right, title, and interest in the property and its authority to grant a license, permit, or other permission to use and occupy the property.

Riparian.
Those areas associated with streams, lakes and wetlands where vegetation communities are predominantly influenced by their association with water.

Riparian corridor.
The vegetated area adjacent to (and including) streams, lakes, rivers, and other watercourses.

Roadway; Roadway Authority.

1.
Roadway.
The portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

2.
Road Authority.
The City or other agency (e.g., Oregon Department of Transportation, Clackamas County, a special purpose district, or other agency) with jurisdiction over a road or street.

Roof pitch.
The slope of a roof, usually described as ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance).

Rooming house.
Providing overnight accommodations to the public for fewer than 30 consecutive days. A community residential home with six or fewer residents, a nursing home, or a residential care facility shall not be considered a rooming house.

Routine repair and maintenance.
Activities directed at preserving an existing allowed use or facility, without expanding the development footprint or site use.

Screen.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, to effectively obscure the view of the base of a wireless communication facility and its auxiliary support equipment.

Self-service storage.
A business that provides individual storage spaces for customers to store personal or business goods. "Self-service storage" includes "mini-storage" and "mini-warehouse."

Senior housing.
Includes independent care and assisted care facilities for the elderly, but excludes nursing homes, convalescent care and institutional type living arrangements unless part of a congregate/assisted-living facility complex, and the congregate care portion does not make up more than 25% of the total gross area of the facility. Senior housing is allowed in multifamily zoning districts, and can consist of a combination of apartments, rowhouses and other types of housing units. Units may be connected to each other by hallways or breezeways.

Setback/setback yard.
The minimum or maximum distance required between a specified object, such as a building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object. Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a building to a specified property line. Setbacks are measured along a horizontal plane as the shortest distance between the lot line and the closest portion of the structure's foundation. A foundation survey in all development districts may be required at the discretion of the City.

Shadow plan platting.
A plan for future development shown on a master plan indicating where future buildings and lot divisions can be placed to ensure efficient development and redevelopment of larger parcels.

Shared driveway.
When land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded for this purpose.

Shared parking.
Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same facilities. See Chapter 16.43.

Shopping street.
A driveway in a commercial development that is designed to mimic a public street with sidewalks, tree wells, pedestrian lighting, and street furnishings. A shopping street may also have on-street parking.

Short-term rental housing.
Renting of a dwelling unit (in full or in part) or accessory dwelling unit for purposes of short-term rental income. Commonly referred to as "AirBnB" (or similar).

Sidewalk.
A surfaced strip of land, legally accessible to the public, or a large segment of the public, improved to accommodate pedestrian traffic.

Sight distance.
The unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object or location to another object or location, usually required the purpose of traffic safety.

Sign.
Any outdoor device, or device visible from outdoors, displaying a message, emblem, figure, painting, drawing, placard, poster, billboard, carving or other thing that is designed, used or intended to convey a message or image and is used to inform or attract the attention of the public. Included in this definition of signs are graphic devices such as logos, trademarks, and attention attracting objects such as wind-driven spinners and portable sign devices, logo sculpture and banners, balloons, streamers, strobe lights, flags, inflatable structures, projected picture signs, holographic projection signs, laser projected designs/images/copy and other attention attracting media and devices. However, the term "sign" shall not include the flag, emblem or insignia owned and maintained by a nation, government unit, school or religious group, except as such emblems shall conform to illumination standards set forth in Chapter 16.45. The term includes the sign structure, display surface and all other component parts of a sign; when dimensions of a sign are specified, the term includes panels and frames; and the term includes both sides of a sign of specified dimensions or display surface area.

Sign, A-Frame (aka A-Board or Sandwich Board).
A double-faced portable sign constructed with an A-shaped frame, composed of two sign boards attached at the top and separated at the bottom, and not supported by a structure in the ground.

Sign, Animated or Moving.
A sign or display, or part of a sign or display, that changes position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.

Sign, Awning.
A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached flat against the surface of the non-rigid materials of an awning.

Sign, Balloon.
An inflatable, stationary, temporary sign of any shape anchored by some means to a structure or the ground. It includes simple children's balloons, hot and cold air balloons, helium filled balloons, blimps, and other dirigibles.

Sign, Banner.
A temporary sign made of nonrigid material without an enclosing framework. For the purposes of this chapter, advertisement flags are to be considered banners. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of an institution, group or a business are excluded.

Sign, Billboard.
A large format sign advertising displays intended for viewing from extended distances, generally more than 50 feet, with a display surface area of 200 square feet or more.

Sign, Canopy.
A type of wall sign painted or printed on, or attached to the canopy fascia.

Sign, Construction.
A temporary sign displayed on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction.

Sign, Construction—Public Utility Facilities.
A temporary sign displayed in conjunction with a construction project for public streets, public waterlines, public sewer lines and pump stations, public storm drain lines and other similar public facilities.

Sign, Directional.
A permanent sign designed and erected to guide the circulation of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site.

Sign, Directory.
A permanent informational sign designed and erected to list the businesses, business occupants or tenants within buildings on the site and to be read by passengers of vehicles or pedestrians or both which are on the site.

Sign, Electrical.
A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used.

Sign Entry/Exit.
A permanent sign designed and erected to show the location of vehicular access onto or off of a location from or to the public right-of-way.

Sign, Festoon.
A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, lights, pennants, streamers, pinwheels or similar signs.

Sign, Fin.
A sign which is supported by a pole or poles or columns and partly by a building.

Sign, Flashing.
Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign exhibiting changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. This includes illuminated signs exhibiting the illusion of movement by means of a preprogrammed repetitious sequential switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign and are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, scintillating, or expanding and contracting light patterns.

Sign, Freestanding.
A sign supported from the ground by its own structure and not attached to a building.

Sign, Illegal.
A sign which is erected, constructed, altered, relocated, maintained or repaired in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

Sign, Illuminated.
A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of lighting the sign. The following are types of sign illumination:

1.
"Direct"
means lighting where-in the light source is visible.

2.
"Fluorescent tube"
means lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a gas-filled tube, with a coating of fluorescent material on its inner surface, which emits visible light.

3.
"Incandescent bulb"
means lighting wherein an electrical current is passed through a filament inside a bulb and the filament emits visible light. The filament source of light may be visible as in clear bulb or bare bulb illumination or it may not be visible as in frosted or painted bulb lighting.

4.
"Indirect"
means lighting wherein the light source is separate from the object to be illuminated, including but not limited to a sign face or cabinet, and is directed to shine on the object or sign.

5.
"Internal"
means a lighting wherein the light source and the bulb or tube enclosing the light source are enclosed within a structure, including but not limited to a sign and are not visible.

6.
"Neon"
means lighting where-in an electrical current is passed through a tube containing neon gas which emits visible light.

Sign, Incidental.
A sign identifying or advertising associated goods, products, services or facilities available on the premises, including but not limited to, trading stamps, credit cards accepted, brand names or price signs.

Sign, Lawn.
A temporary, freestanding or A-frame sign.

Sign, Marquee.
A type of wall sign painted, printed on, or attached to the marquee fascia.

Sign, Monument.
A ground-level sign not mounted on a pole or structure. This sign is permanently affixed at grade and has a monolithic or columnar line and maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top.

Sign, Nonconforming.
A sign lawfully erected and existing, and properly maintained and repaired prior to the adoption of this Code and Chapter 16.45, but which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.

Sign, Obsolete.
A sign that calls attention to a business or other activity or a profession, commodity, product, service or entertainment no longer carried on, produced, sold or offered.

Sign, Obstructing.
A sign, including its supports and structure, which interferes with the use of a fire escape, exit or a window such that light, ventilation or ingress and egress is reduced below the minimum required by law.

Sign, Off-premises.
A sign which identifies or gives directions to a use or activity and which is located on premises other than where the activity or use is provided.

Sign, Projecting.
A sign projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building.

Sign, Public.
A sign erected and maintained by a special purpose district, public school district, municipal, County, State or Federal government, or any political subdivision or agency thereof.

Sign, Readerboard.
A sign no greater than 24 square feet in size on which copy can be changed electronically by using patterns of lights that may be changed at intermittent intervals or can be changed manually, in the field, using letters, numbers or symbols which can be affixed to the sign face.

Sign, Roof.
A sign erected or maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure.

Sign, Shingle.
A rigid sign hanging from an awning, canopy, marquee or building overhang or attached to a wall and perpendicular to that wall.

Sign, Subdivision.
A sign located on land in a recorded subdivision approved through the City of Happy Valley subdivision review process.

Sign, Temporary.
A sign that will become obsolete after the occurrence of an event or series of events. Temporary signs include, but are not limited to, for sale and lease signs, garage sale signs and political campaign signs. Temporary signs are not permanently attached to the ground (set on or post driven or dug into the ground with no footing or foundation), wall or building.

Sign, Traffic Control.
A sign or device used as an official route marker, guide sign, warning sign or sign directing or regulating traffic or pedestrians which has been erected by or under order of the City of Happy Valley, the State or Federal governments.

Sign, Wall.
A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure.

Sign clearance.
The distance from the grade directly below a sign to the bottom of the lowest portion of the sign.

Sign contractor.
A person engaged in the business of sign construction, sign maintenance or sign repair and registered with the Oregon Construction Contractors Board.

Sign face.
The total of display surface area visible from one side of a sign.

Sign face area.
The portion of a sign containing copy and the background for the copy.

Sign maintenance.
Normal care needed to keep a sign functional such as cleaning, painting, oiling and changing bulbs and tubes.

Sign Official.
Planning Official or designee.

Sign structure.
One or more supports, uprights, braces, or other framework of a sign.

Significant wetland.
A wetland mapped on the City local wetlands inventory.

Site.
For land divisions, property line adjustments, and lot consolidations, the site is the lots, lots of record, parcels, or tracts proposed to be divided or reconfigured. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership except as follows:

1.

If a proposed development includes multiple ownerships, then the site is the combined area of all the ownerships.

2.

If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

3.

If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for development.

Site frontage.
The part of a site that abuts a street. See also "block frontage."

Siting.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, the location, construction, collocation, modification, or installation of a wireless communication facility.

Skilled nursing facility.
Skilled nursing facilities provide 24 hour direct medical, nursing and other health services. Registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and nurses' aides provide services prescribed by resident(s) physician(s). Skilled nursing is for those persons who need health supervision but not hospitalization. The emphasis of this use is on nursing care, but convalescent, restorative physical, occupational, speech, and respiratory therapies are also provided. The level of care may also include specialized nursing services such as specialized nutrition, rehabilitation services and monitoring of unstable conditions. The term skilled nursing facility is also synonymous with the terms nursing facility and nursing home.

Slope.
The "slope" of a lot is calculated pursuant to Chapter 16.32.

Small cell network.
A collection of functionally related small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless communication service. The small cell facilities in a small cell network may be located on one or more utility structures or support structures within and/or outside of the public right-of-way.

Small wireless facilities.
As defined by the Federal Communications Commission (CFR 1.1312.e.2), facilities that meet the following conditions:

1.

The facilities are mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including their antennas (as defined in CFR 1.1320.d);

2.

The facilities are mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other adjacent structures;

3.

The facilities do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is greater;

4.

Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

5.

All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume;

6.

The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under Part 17 of 47 CFR; and

7.

The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio-frequency radiation in excess of applicable safety standards specified in CFR 1.2307.b.

Stealth technology.
A facility, including, but not limited to, antennas, support towers, and ancillary support equipment that, to the extent feasible, are screened or otherwise designed such that the facility blends in with the surrounding area and visual impacts from nearby streets or properties are minimized. In the case of a modification, the change or alteration does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of a support structure. In the case of a support tower or monopole, "stealth technology" also means a facility that is designed and installed with specific features that render it visually similar to nearby objects such as trees, flag poles, or utility poles.

Steep slopes.
Slopes that are equal to or greater than 15%. (See Chapter 16.32.)

Storefront character.
The character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with ground-floor display windows, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), corner building entrances or recessed entries, and similar features.

Stormwater detention facility.
A pond, swale or underground systems engineered to detain stormwater from the proposed development according to the rules and regulations of the City and Clackamas County Water Environment Services.

Stormwater management system.
A stormwater facility (e.g., conveyance, detention/retention, treatment system or outfall) intended to control and manage stormwater to minimize the detrimental effects of surface water runoff.

Stormwater pretreatment facility.
Any structure or drainageway that is designed, constructed and maintained to collect and filter, retain or detain surface water runoff during and after a storm event for the purpose of water quality improvement.

Story.
The portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of any floor next above, except that the top story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar is more than five feet above grade, such basement or cellar shall be considered a story.

Stream.
An area where enough natural surface water flows to produce a stream channel, such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water either intermittently or during most of the year. This includes:

1.

The water itself, including any vegetation, aquatic life, or habitat;

2.

Beds and banks below the high water level which may contain water, whether or not water is actually present;

3.

The floodplain between the high water levels of connected side channels;

4.

Beaver ponds, oxbows, and side channels if they are connected by surface flow to the stream during a portion of the year; and stream-associated wetlands.

Stream channel.
An area with evidence of perennial or seasonal water passage. The depression between the banks worn by the regular and usual flow of the water. The channel need not contain water year-round. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses.

Street.
A public right-of-way or private tract that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle travel or for motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting property. It shall include the terms street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms. Street types include:

1.
Major arterial.
A street which provides a connection between major traffic generators and is primarily concerned with the movement of large volumes of traffic within an urban area. Includes highways and other major streets with limited or no direct access from adjoining properties.

2.
Minor arterial.
A street which generally serves as a connection between streets of both greater and lesser capacities traffic volumes. Minor arterials may be constructed to structural standards which are below that of a major arterial.

3.
Collector road.
A street which provides connection between local street networks and arterial streets. This type of street serves traffic within commercial, industrial, and residential neighborhood areas.

4.
Neighborhood street.
A street that is intended to provide direct access to abutting residential properties and discourage through traffic movements not related to the neighborhood in which the residential street is located.

5.
Local street.
A street which provides minor traffic service.

6.
Lane.
A street having two open ends not exceeding 1,500 feet in length and being constructed to the same specifications as a cul-de-sac.

7.
Alley.
An undedicated private right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common parking area. Generally, alleys provide secondary vehicle access; however, where vehicle access from the street is not allowed, not possible, or not desirable the alley may provide primary vehicle access.

8.
Cul-de-sac.
A street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated and provided with a vehicular turnaround at the termination of such street.

9.
Private street.
An undedicated private right-of-way providing access from a public street to any property, except flag lots.

10.
Dead-end street.
A street that connects to another street at only one end and does not have a City-approved turnaround on its other end. A pedestrian connection may extend from the end of a dead-end street to connect with another street of any type, or with another pedestrian connection.

Street connectivity.
Expressed as the number of street and/or access way connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods.

Street-facing façade/wall.
All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view that are at an angle of 45 degrees or less from a street lot line.

Street frontage.
A street parallel to and adjacent to arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from the through traffic.

Street furniture/furnishings.
Benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mail boxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities; may be located within a street furnishings zone or building front zone of a sidewalk or in a plaza. See also "pedestrian amenities."

Street light only pole.
Any pole installed for the exclusive purpose of supporting street lighting facilities.

Street stub.
A temporary street ending where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as those properties develop. Not a permanent street-end or dead-end street.

Street tree.
A tree planted in the public right-of-way in a planter strip or tree well between the street and sidewalk, or within a public utility and street tree easement along public or private streets. Street trees have a main trunk and are not allowed to have multiple stems.

Structure.
Anything constructed or built, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including tennis courts and other recreational facilities, but excluding fences and grade level improvements such as pavement for driveways or concrete flatwork such as patios.

Structure height.
The height of a structure, and the cumulative height of a building with any appurtenant structures. (See definition of "building height.")

Subdivision.
To divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year. See also Chapter 16.63, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments and ORS 92.010(13).

Subject property.
The parcel or parcels of land that are the subject of the permit and/or approval action. (See "site.")

Substantial change in physical dimensions.
For the purposes of Section 16.44.020, a modification which meets one or more of the following criteria:

1.

The modification would increase the existing height of a support tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater, or would increase the height of a base station by more than 10 feet or 10%, whichever is greater, provided the support tower or base station is located outside the right-of-way; or

2.

The modification would protrude from the edge of the support tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the support tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, and further provided the support tower is outside the right-of-way; and for towers in the right-of-way and base stations, the modification would increase the height more than 10% or six feet, whichever is greater; or

3.

The modification would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or for support towers in the right-of-way and base stations, the modification involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the support tower or base station, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the support tower or base station; or

4.

The modification would involve excavation or deployment outside the current site, defined, with respect to support towers other than support towers in the right-of-way, as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the support tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site; with respect to support towers in the right-of-way and base stations, site is restricted to that area in proximity to the support tower, base station, or auxiliary support equipment already deployed on the ground; or

5.

A replacement structure; or

6.

The modification would defeat the concealment elements of the support tower or base station; or

7.

The modification does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the support tower, base station, or base station equipment, provided that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition.

Substantial compliance.
The City Comprehensive Plan and implementing ordinances, on the whole, conform with the purposes of the performance standards in the functional plan and any failure to meet individual performance standard requirements is technical or minor in nature.

Sunrise Expressway.
The Sunrise Expressway is a multi-lane highway planned for three through lanes and auxiliary lanes associated with the interchanges planned to be built in phases to provide safe and efficient high speed and high volume traffic movement. The primary function is to provide for interurban travel including for freight mobility. Speeds are moderate to high. Public road connections are highly controlled and parking is prohibited. Pedestrian facilities are separated from the roadway and bikeways are part of the roadway. Private access is discouraged and the FHWA's Sunrise Project I-205 to Rock Creek Junction Record of Decision reflects the planned public access. See Figure PA-5.

Swale.
A type of stormwater facility. Usually a broad, shallow depression with plants that filter and process contaminants.

Tangent.
Meeting a curve or surface in a single point.

Terrace.
A porch or promenade supported by columns, or a flat roof or other platform on a building.

Through lot.
See "lot type."

Through street.
A street that connects to other streets at both ends.

Tiedown (manufactured home).
Any device designed to anchor a manufactured home securely to the ground.

Top of bank.
The same as "bankful stage" defined in OAR 141-85-010(2).

Topping (tree).
The severe cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the natural canopy and disfigure the tree. With regard to "fir," "evergreen" or any other variety of conifer, "topping" means the removal of any portion of the highest point of the tree. If the tip has curled over, it will still constitute the highest point of the tree.

Tract.
A piece of land within a platted subdivision, partition or planned unit development reserved for open space, utility corridor, recreation facilities, natural resource area, or other purpose; may be dedicated to a homeowner's association or other entity for maintenance.

Trailer (travel).
A vacation structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with plumbing, sink or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not used as a residence.

Transfer station.
A facility used as part of a solid waste collection and disposal system or resource recovery system, between a collection route and a processing facility or disposal site, which may include areas designated for general public drop off of items for disposal, reuse or recycling, and areas designated for public education regarding solid waste and recycling.

Transit street.
A street that is classified in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive Plan as a bus route.

Transportation mode.
The method of transportation (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, train, etc.).

Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park/campground.
A lot or parcel on which two or more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, tent trailers, tent sites, capers, and/or similar vehicles or devices are permitted outright, for a stay of limited duration, with or without a charge or fee.

Tree.
A tree means a living standing woody plant having a main trunk or group of multiple trunks.

Tree canopy.
The ground area that, when viewed from above the crown of one or more trees, is mostly covered by the tree(s). For deciduous trees, canopy area is based on the time of year when foliage is present.

Tree farm.
Any property being lawfully utilized for the commercial production of landscaping, nursery stock or Christmas trees, and including fruit and nut orchards; provided, however, that any land previously designated for exclusive farm use (EFU) by Clackamas County, within a state or County tax deferral program for timber production, and subsequently annexed into the City, shall be treated as a "tree farm" for so long as the deferrals remain in effect. Forested lands annexed within the City limits that hold a Clackamas County rural residential farm forest—five acre minimum parcel size (RRFF-5) or farm forest—10 acre minimum parcel size (FF-10) or annexed lands that have subsequently received urban zoning, are not classified as "tree farms" unless trees have been planted in symmetrical rows.

Tree well.
A planter area cut out of a sidewalk within the street furnishing zone, planted with a street tree and including groundcover or a grate cover; typically used in commercial districts where on-street parking or pedestrian traffic makes the use of a planter strip impracticable.

Truck.
A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than 10 persons. Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. See also National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3.

1.
Light truck.
Trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels.

2.
Medium truck.
Trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the heavy truck category.

3.
Heavy truck.
Trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles.

Turnaround.
A vehicle maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around.

Undergrounding.
The conversion of overhead utility facilities to underground utility facilities in a variety of conduits, vaults and all other necessary utility infrastructure.

Uniformity of illumination.
The ratio of average illumination level on the roadway to the minimum illumination at any point on the roadway.

Urban development value.
The economic value of a property lot or parcel as determined by analyzing three separate variables: assessed land value, value as a property that could generate jobs ("employment value"), and the Metro 2040 design type designation of property. The urban development value of all properties containing regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat is depicted on the Metro Habitat Urban Development Value Map.

Urban growth boundary (UGB).
Urban growth boundary adopted pursuant to ORS Chapter 197.

Usable open space.
Planned and improved open space or outdoor facilities that provide active and passive recreational or relaxation opportunities, including, but not limited to one of the following: parks, play areas; improved playing fields; publicly accessible natural or wildlife viewing areas; unimproved park land dedicated or owned by a public entity; arboretums and gardens, ponds and water features; maintained and landscaped walking paths and running trails; public and private pedestrian spaces; and other similar environments. Usable open space does not include slopes over 25%, wetlands, natural areas, streams or stream banks where access and improvements are prohibited under Federal or state law (including OAR 660-23, DLCD Goal 5 regulations). If such areas are publicly accessible, and if viewing areas and improvements are allowed and made at the periphery of the areas to enhance access to and viewing of the wildlife and/or natural areas, then those lands may be considered as usable open space.

Use.
The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

Utility facilities.
Buildings, structures or any constructed portion of a system which provides for the production, transmission, conveyance, delivery or furnishing of services including, but not limited to, heat, light, water, power, natural gas, sanitary sewer, stormwater, telephone and cable television. Utility facilities do not include stormwater pretreatment facilities.

Utility trailer.
A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than 16 feet are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.

Vacate plat/street.
To abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. Vacation of a plat typically returns the property to the adjoining owners and restores it to an undivided condition and ownership.

Vacation home rental.
A commercial use of a single-family or duplex dwelling unit where the unit is rented for periods of time of 28 or fewer consecutive days.

Variance.
An administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this title. (See Chapter 16.71.)

Vegetated corridor.
The area of setback between the top of bank of a protected water feature and the delineated edge of the water quality resource area. (See Chapter 16.34.)

Vehicle areas.
All of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also "driveway" and "parking area."

View corridor.
A strip of land, not to exceed 30 feet in width, through or over which an aesthetically pleasing vista of the surrounding landscape or cityscape may be seen.

Vision clearance area.
Those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance. See standards in Section 16.50.030.B.

Wall.
A masonry or similar structure serving to enclose or divide an area.

Wall area.
The measurement in square feet of a building wall based on the height and width of an architectural elevation.

Warehouse.
A building used primarily for the storage of materials or goods for use on the site or for later distribution.

Waste collection areas.
Waste collection areas include areas set aside or designed to be used for garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. Waste collection areas include areas occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles.

Water bodies.
Permanently or temporarily flooded lands which may lie below the deepwater boundary of wetlands. Water bodies include rivers, streams, creeks, sloughs, drainageways, lakes, and ponds.

Water quality facility.
Any structure or drainageway that is designed, constructed and maintained to collect and filter, retain or detain surface water runoff during and after a storm event for the purpose of water quality improvement. It may also include, but is not limited to, existing features such as constructed wetlands, water quality swales, and ponds that are maintained as stormwater quality control facilities.

Water quality resource areas.
Vegetated corridors and the adjacent protected water feature as established in Chapter 16.34.

Watershed.
A geographic unit defined by the flows of rainwater or snowmelt. All land in a watershed drains to a common outlet, such as a stream, lake or wetland.

Wetland.
Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Wetlands are those areas identified and delineated by a qualified wetland specialist as set forth in the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual.

Window.
A transparent or semi-transparent (not more than 50% opaque) glazing on a building façade. For the purpose of this Code, a window may be a display window (e.g., for merchandise, art, etc.) that is integral to a building design, but a window is not a display box mounted onto the exterior of a building.

Wireless communications facility.
Any structure, antenna, equipment or other device that transmits and/or receives wireless communications, including, but not limited to, antennas of any type, support towers, support structures, equipment cabinets, and other auxiliary support equipment associated with the transmission of wireless communications, excluding amateur radio stations as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

Wireless communications service.
The providing or offering for rent, sale, lease or in exchange for other consideration, of the transmittal and reception of voice, data, image, graphic and other information by the use of current or future wireless communications facilities. Also, any wireless communication services authorized by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended, that currently exist or that may be developed in the future, including, but not limited to, cellular, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging, similar Federal Communications Commission-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, but excluding wireless communication services used exclusively by gas and electric utilities and cooperative utilities for internal communications of an operational nature.

Woody vegetation.
Areas that are part of a contiguous area one acre or larger of shrub or open or scattered forest canopy (less than 60% crown closure) located within 300 feet of a surface stream.

Yard.
The area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and nearest property line).

Zero-lot line house.
A single-family detached dwelling with one "zero" side yard setback.

(Ord. 389 § 1(Exh. A), 2009; Ord. 395 § 2, 2009; Ord. 398 § 1, 2010; Ord. 411 § 1, 2011; Ord. 433 § 1, 2013; Ord. 446 § 1, 2014; Ord. 468 § 1, 2014; Ord. 474 § 1, 2015; Ord. 481 § 1, 2015; Ord. 491 § 1, 2016; Ord. 501 § 1, 2016; Ord. 503 § 1, 2016; Ord. 507 § 1, 2016; Ord. 521 § 3, 2017; Ord. 539 § 1, 2018; Ord. 545 § 1, 2019; Ord. 550 § 1, 2020; Ord. 552 § 1, 2020; Ord. 556 § 1, 2021; Ord. 561 § 1, 2022; Ord. 567 § 1, 2023; Ord. 572 § 1, 2023; Ord. 582, 3/19/2024; Ord. 592, 6/3/2025; Ord. 593, 6/17/2025)
