 
[5.0200]-1 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
SECTION 5.0200 
HILLSIDE AND GEOLOGIC RISK OVERLAY (HGRO) 
General 
5.0201 Purpose 
5.0202 Coordination with Other Regulations 
5.0203 Applicability 
5.0204 Prohibitions 
5.0205 Exempt Uses and Activities 
5.0206 Permit Required 
5.0207 HGRO Application Requirements  
Standards 
5.0208 Tree and Vegetation Standards within the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) 
5.0209 General Standards for Development within the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) 
5.0210 Standards for Specific Development Types within the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) 
5.0211 Additional Development Standards for Highly Sloped Subareas (HSS) 
Process 
5.0212 Alternative Review 
5.0213 Modification of HGRO Standards 
5.0214 HGRO Mapping Protocols 
5.0215 HGRO Map Administration and Correction 
5.0216 Violations 
GENERAL  
5.0201  PURPOSE    
The purpose of the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) is to ensure that development in or adjacent to 
hillside areas occurs in such a manner as to: 
A. Minimize the potential for earth movement and resultant hazards to life and property, 
B. Minimize soil erosion and siltation, 
C. Protect water quality, 
D. Minimize vegetation removal in sloped areas, 
E. Protect the aesthetic and scenic qualities of hillside areas, 
F. Assure the compatibility of a new development with surrounding areas, 
G. Encourage site and building design which is consistent with the natural topography; and 
 
[5.0200]-2 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
H. Minimize the cost of public infrastructure provision. 
I. Provide for adequate access for emergency services. 
5.0202  COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS   
A. Allowed Uses. Uses permitted in the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay shall be those listed as permitted in 
the underlying district designated for the site unless conflicting standards apply. 
B. Conflicting Standards. The requirements of this Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) apply in addition 
to other applicable local, state, regional, and federal development requirements. Conflicts between 
standards for allowed and conflicting uses shall be resolved as follows: 
1. Where there is a conflict between the standards of the underlying district or the Planned Development 
standards and the standards of this HGRO, the standards of the HGRO shall apply. 
2. Where there is a conflict between the standards of the HGRO and other overlay districts the most 
restrictive will apply. 
3. Street Trees, Parking Lot Trees, Buffer Trees and all trees within approved Permanent Disturbance 
Areas are subject to the tree removal and mitigation requirements of Section 9.1000. All other trees 
within the HGRO are subject to the tree removal, protection and mitigation requirements of the 
HGRO. 
4. In all other situations, the most stringent of the conflicting standards apply. 
C. Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. Clarifications, commentary and examples are given in 
the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. Content of the Guidance Manual is to be used in 
tandem with development code and does not substitute for amend or supersede development code. 
D. For the purposes of Section 5.0200 “land division” does not include middle housing land divisions pursuant 
to Section 6.0500 and “lot” does not include middle housing lots created by middle housing land divisions. 
5.0203  APPLICABILITY   
A. Unless exempt pursuant to Section 5.0205 the regulations of this chapter apply when the following 
regulated activities are proposed within the boundaries of the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) 
on the City’s Community Development Plan Map. 
1. Development or redevelopment. 
2. All land divisions or property line adjustments. 
3. Removing, cutting, mowing, clearing, burning, or application or herbicides to vegetation. 
4. Changing topography, grading, excavating, or filling. 
5. Resource Enhancement. 
6. Construction or expansions of right-of-way improvements. 
7. Placement or stockpiling of woody debris. 
B. Development within an HGRO in accordance with the provisions of this Overlay shall not result in a change 
of the HGRO status of such developed areas on a property. In the case of a later development request 
seeking to develop within previously undisturbed HGRO on a property where a prior development request 
was subject to the provisions of this Overlay, the calculation of the maximum disturbance area allowed on 
 
[5.0200]-3 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
the property shall be based on the location of the HGRO (or predecessor) at the time the previous 
development was approved. 
C. For the purposes of this section “Lots created prior to January 15, 2021” means lots created through an 
application for tentative land division made prior to January 15, 2021 which did not expire Development 
Standards 
5.0204  PROHIBITIONS   
The following prohibitions apply within the HGRO. These prohibitions do not apply to the continuation, in the 
same manner, of activities which were lawfully begun before the effective date of this ordinance, activities 
approved pursuant to the provisions of this Overlay under Section 5.0208-5.0213, or activities which are 
exempt in accordance with Section 5.0205. An activity continuing in the same manner means that there is no 
expansion in the scope of that activity within the HGRO. 
A. Stockpiling of woody debris is prohibited as follows: 
1. On or within 30 feet of a mapped landslide deposit or associated head and flank scarps (per current 
Department of Geology and Mineral Industries’ SLIDO database), 
2. Within 30 feet of a stream, as measured in horizontal feet from stream centerline, or 
3. Within the Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS). 
B. Any new gardens, lawns, structures, or development other than those allowed outright (exempted) or that 
is part of a regulated use that is approved by an HGRO permit. 
C. The dumping of materials of any kind. 
D. Grading, placement of fill, or the removal of native vegetation other than those allowed outright 
(exempted) or that is part of a regulated use that is approved by an HGRO permit. 
5.0205  EXEMPT USES AND ACTIVITIES   
An exemption from obtaining a permit under this section does not exempt development from obtaining  
permits required by other sections of the code. 
A. Exemptions for HGRO Areas including HSS. Uses and activities meeting one or more of the following 
descriptions are exempt from the permit requirements of the HGRO standards: 
1. A building permit for a phased development project for which the Applicant has previously met the 
application requirements, as long as the area of new construction was identified on the original permit 
and no new portion of the HGRO will be disturbed. 
2. Operation, maintenance or repair of existing improvements. 
3. Alteration or replacement of existing structures that do not alter building footprint. 
4. The trenchless subsurface installation of utilities (e.g., via boring, jacking, or microtunneling), provided 
there is no vegetation removal beyond the limits of this section, no earth movement, and no impacts 
to trees (e.g., damage to the root zone). 
5. The planting of trees as designated and identified on the Gresham Native Plant List. 
6. The planting, removal, or maintenance of Street, Parking Lot, or Buffer Trees as defined in Section 
9.1014. 
 
[5.0200]-4 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
7. The planting and maintenance of landscaped areas within an approved permanent disturbance area, 
including tree removal. 
8. Pruning and maintenance of trees which adheres to ANSI pruning standards. 
9. Restoration work including stand management-related removal of no more than three trees when 
conducted as part of an annual restoration plan approved by the City. 
10. Fencing, excluding construction of walls. 
B. Additional Exemptions for HGRO Areas other than Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS). Except within the HSS, the 
following uses and activities are exempt from the permit requirements of the HGRO standards provided 
that in no case shall the activity result in the removal of any non-required trees over 6 inches DBH (see 
definition of “Required Tree” in Section 3.0103) outside of a permanent disturbance area or leave more 
than 500 square feet of ground exposed (devoid of stabilizing vegetation) between October 1 and May 1. 
1. One time excavation or filling of land (including temporary stockpiles) not exceeding 10 cubic yards per 
lot. 
2. One time installation of impervious surface not exceeding 1,000 square feet per site. 
3. Construction of retaining walls not exceeding 4 feet in height. 
4. Construction of ponds and in ground swimming pools not exceeding 1.5 cubic yards. 
5. Any development that does not require a building permit except for development activities which 
exceed one or more of the thresholds in 1 through 4, above. 
6. Outdoor bike and pedestrian recreation facilities for public use, limited to accessways, trails, picnic 
areas, or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks that include benches and outdoor 
furniture. 
5.0206  PERMIT REQUIRED   
Unless exempt pursuant to Section 5.0205, a Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) permit is required for 
all regulated activities within the HGRO as specified in Table 5.0206-1. 
Table 5.0206-1: Permit Procedure and Applicable Standards for Development Within an HGRO  
PROPOSED ACTIVITY OR REQUEST PERMIT PROCEDURE APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay permits review 
concurrent with land use application except as 
specified below 
Same as concurrent 
land use application 
Varies 
Programmatic Permit Type II Section 5.0208(D) 
Alternate Review Type II Section 5.0212 
Modification of HGRO Standards Type II/III Section 5.0213 
Verification of a Disturbance Area boundary on a 
developed lot with no concurrent land use application 
Type I Section 5.0207(E) 
All other Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay permits 
with no concurrent land use application 
Type I Varies 
 
 
 
[5.0200]-5 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
5.0207  HGRO APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS   
Applications must include the items required for the applicable procedure type in accordance with Article 11, 
other applicable sections of the code, Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual, and the HGRO 
application submittal requirements as specified in Table 5.0207-1. Applications for Alternative Review must 
also include the submittal requirements specified in Section 5.0212. 
Table 5.0207-1: HGRO Submittal Requirements  
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS IN 5.0207 
Tree removal (non-exempt) (other than tree 
removal pursuant to a programmatic permit 
submitted in accordance with Section 
5.0208(D)) 
• Tree Removal/Protection/Revegetation Plan and 
Documentation (Subsection (A)) 
Tree removal pursuant to a programmatic 
permit in accordance with Section 5.0208(D) 
• Tree Removal/Protection/Revegetation Plan and 
Documentation (Subsection (A)) 
• Certification and Documentation (Subsection (C)) if 
storage of woody debris exceeds dimensions 
• Additional Plans and Narrative Subsection (D) 
All other non-exempt development activities 
(e.g., design review, special use review, 
building permits, land divisions, etc.) 
• Tree Removal/Protection/Revegetation Plan and 
Documentation (Subsection (A)) 
• Construction Management and Preliminary Grading Plan 
(Subsection (B)) 
• Certification and Documentation (Subsection (C)) 
• Additional Plans and Narrative (Subsection (D)) 
Verification or establishment of a 
disturbance area boundary on a developed 
lot with no concurrent land use application 
• Disturbance Area Boundary Verification (Subsection (E)) 
 
A. Tree Removal, Protection, and Revegetation Plan. A Tree Removal, Protection, and Revegetation Plan that 
includes, at a minimum, the following: 
1. Evidence regarding the credentials of the qualified professional (e.g., certified arborist, geotechnical 
professional, or landscape architect) who made assessments or prepared the plan. 
2. If Applicant is requesting tree removal on the basis that the tree(s) is on the City of Gresham Invasive 
Plant List, the identity of the species including in-focus, high resolution photographs supporting 
identification of species such as habitat, trunk, crown, flowers, fruits, branches, twigs, and leaves. 
3. If Applicant is requesting tree removal on the basis that the tree(s) meets the definition of dangerous 
tree, an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) basic tree risk assessment prepared by a qualified 
arborist is required. 
4. If tree replacement is required but cannot be achieved onsite (per Section 5.0208(C)(6)), a statement 
that the Applicant proposes to make a payment-in-lieu and documentation supporting this request. 
5. A tree removal / revegetation map identifying the following: 
 
 
[5.0200]-6 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
a. The boundary of the entire project site and the boundary of the HGRO (and HSS, if applicable) on 
the site, 
b. The location on the site where tree removal is proposed, 
c. The species, size, and location of individual trees over 6 inches DBH that are proposed for removal, 
d. All trees 6 inches DBH or greater (numbered) within 50 feet of trees to be removed, 
e. The methods used to protect all other trees over 6 inches DBH on the site, and 
f. The species, size and location of mitigation trees (if proposed). 
B. Construction Management and Preliminary Grading Plan. In addition to any other plan required by Section 
9.0500, the application shall include a construction management and preliminary grading plan that 
includes, at a minimum, the following: 
1. Location of site access and egress that construction equipment will use. 
2. Equipment and material staging and stockpile areas. 
3. Erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the City of Gresham “Erosion Prevention 
and Sediment Control Manual” appendix of the Gresham Stormwater Management Manual. 
4. Critical Root Zone of all trees to be preserved within the Disturbance Area and within 50 feet of the 
Disturbance Area (measured in horizontal distance from the edge of Disturbance Area) and location 
and type of tree protection (per Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual). 
5. Location and square footage of all disturbance areas to be cut, filled or cleared, including but not 
limited to roads, sidewalks, utilities, yards and landscaping, building envelopes or pads (buildable 
areas), driveways, and other accessways. The total square footage shall also be summed and 
expressed as a percentage of the total area of the parcel. Grading area limitations are described in 
Sections 5.0209, 5.0210 and 5.0211. 
C. Certification. A certification form (provided by the City) must be prepared or reviewed and stamped by a 
Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer and submitted along with any documentation 
and plans relied on in issuing the certification. The purpose of the Certification is to ensure that 
development in or adjacent to hillside areas is evaluated by a Certified Engineering Geologist or 
Geotechnical Engineer to ensure it is designed in a manner that provides for public health, safety, and 
welfare. 
1. Where certification is required for a permit, a permit shall only be issued if a Certified Engineering 
Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer affirms and certifies the following based on their professional 
opinion. A permit shall not be granted if a Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer 
does not affirm and certify the following based on their professional opinion: 
a. Potential landslide hazards identified for this site and nearby and the DOGAMI Interpretive Map 
Series 57 (IMS-57) Landslide hazard and risk study of central and western Multnomah County, 
Oregon, by William J. Burns, Nancy C. Calhoun, Jon J. Franczyk, Kassandra O. Lindsey, and Lina Ma, 
2018 (Report and Data) have been reviewed; 
b. The proposed development activity was reviewed according to industry standards for geologic 
engineering in Oregon; 
 
 
 
[5.0200]-7 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
c. Either: 
i. That the proposed development activity will not be negatively impacted by, or cause negative 
impacts to onsite and offsite engineering geological conditions, processes, and hazards, 
including but not limited to, existing or post development soil stability or any of the following 
site features: springs or seeps, depth of soil to bedrock, variations in soil types, or a 
combination of these conditions; or 
ii. If proposed development activity will be negatively impacted by or cause negative impacts to 
onsite and offsite engineering geological conditions, processes, and hazards, including but not 
limited to, any of the features listed in Subsection (C)(1)(c)(i) above, the plans incorporated 
the methods for safely mitigating the impact(s).  
d. Where applicable, attest to the following certification requirements stated in Subsections 
5.0208(D), 5.0209(A), 5.0209(D), 5.0211(B), 5.0212(B), or 5.0212(C). 
2. Certification that is submitted pursuant to Subsection (1) shall include the Applicant’s statement that 
they will develop the site in accordance with the Certified Engineering Geologist’s or Geotechnical 
Engineer’s certification and that they will schedule and perform the recommended geotechnical 
engineer or certified engineering geologist site inspections. 
3. In determining if the Certification satisfies the permit requirements, the City shall review the 
Certification only to determine whether a Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer has 
affirmed and certified that the proposal meets the above listed requirements. The City shall not 
substitute its judgement or discretion for the professional judgement of the Certified Engineering 
Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer. 
D. Additional Plans and Narrative. Additional plans and narrative necessary as determined by the City to 
demonstrate compliance with the applicable standards of the HGRO. 
E. Disturbance Area Boundary Verification. Owners of individual legal lots created and developed with a 
single detached dwelling or middle housing prior to January 15, 2021 who wish to establish or verify an 
approved permanent disturbance area boundary on that lot may submit a Disturbance Area Boundary 
Verification request form (provided by the City). The form shall be accompanied by aerial photography or 
other evidence that predates January 15, 2021 which identifies the location of all areas meeting the 
definition of permanent disturbance area. The date of the evidence must be verifiable by the City. 
STANDARDS  
5.020 8 TREE AND VEGETATION STANDARDS WITHIN THE HILLSIDE AND 
GEOLOGIC RISK OVERLAY (HGRO)    
Trees and vegetation provide protection against soil erosion and earth movement as well as enhance the 
aesthetic value of those hillside areas that may be highly visible to the surrounding community. 
A. Trees and Vegetation Protection. Except as provided in Subsections (1) through (4) below, land within the 
HGRO that is outside of a previously approved permanent disturbance area shall be retained in a natural 
state. Lands to be retained in a natural state shall be protected from damage during construction. 
Protection methods shall be in accordance with the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
 
[5.0200]-8 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
All trees within approved Permanent Disturbance Areas are subject to the tree removal and mitigation 
requirements of Section 9.1000. The following standards apply outside of an approved Permanent 
Disturbance Area: 
1. A tree over 6 inches DBH can be removed in the following circumstances if mitigation is provided in 
accordance with Subsection (B): 
a. The tree is identified as a species on Gresham Invasive Plant List by an arborist, professional 
wetland scientist, or landscape architect. Applications must include in-focus, high resolution 
photographs supporting identification to species such as habitat, trunk, crown, flowers, fruits, 
branches, twigs, and leaves, 
b. The tree is found to meet the definition of dangerous tree by a qualified arborist who has 
completed a basic tree risk assessment. The risk assessment shall be included with application. 
Conversion of a dangerous tree to a snag which involves the removal of part of the tree and 
retention as a habitat tree may be allowed with the dangerous tree permit, or 
c. The tree is within an approved temporary disturbance area and is less than 24 inches DBH. 
2. Trees 6 inches DBH or less and other vegetation may be removed provided that the area is stabilized 
with vegetation as follows: 
a. No more than 500 square feet of ground shall be left exposed between October 1 and May 1 each 
year, and 
b. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized with new native vegetative cover prior to October 1 in any given 
year. 
3. Trees shall not be removed before public facility construction plans are approved, building permits are 
issued, or relevant development permits are issued. When removing a tree, other trees on the site 
shall be protected from damage during construction, and any disturbed soils shall be stabilized with 
new vegetative cover by seeding. Protection methods shall be in accordance with the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
4. All required revegetation shall be installed per Section 5.0208(C). 
B. Tree Replacement Quantity. The number of replacement trees required for tree removal shall be as 
specified below. Replacement trees shall be planted in accordance with Subsection (C). 
1. Dangerous Tree Removal, including conversion to Habitat Tree (snag). For each dangerous tree 
removed one replacement tree shall be planted. 
2. Other tree replacement. Each tree removed for reasons other than dangerous tree replacement is 
subject to the replacement rates in Table 5.0208-1. 
Table 5.0208-1: Tree Replacement  
DIAMETER OF REMOVED TREE 
 (MEASURED 4.5 FEET ABOVE GROUND) 
NUMBER OF REPLACEMENT TREES 
REQUIRED 
6 in. up to 24 in. DBH 2 trees 
Above 24 in. up to 36 in. DBH 3 trees 
Above 36 in. DBH 6 trees 
 
 
 
[5.0200]-9 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
C. Replacement Trees and Vegetation 
1. Location. Replacement trees shall be located as follows: 
a. Replacement of trees removed from the Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) shall be located within the 
HSS. 
b. Replacement of trees removed from the HGRO outside the HSS shall be located within the HGRO 
outside of the Permanent Disturbance Area. 
2. Species. Replacement trees and vegetation shall be as specified in the Gresham Environmental 
Technical Guidance Manual. 
3. Size. Replacement Trees shall be one gallon, bareroot, plugs, or stakes as specified in the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual or at the discretion of the Applicant, as specified by an 
arborist. 
4. Timing. Vegetation and trees required by Subsections (A) and (B) shall be installed prior to acceptance 
of public facilities in the case of land division or approval of a final building inspection. Within the 
temporary disturbance area ground cover shall be planted before the next wet-weather period and 
trees shall be planted before the end of next wet-weather period (October 15 to March 15) or as 
otherwise specified in the permit. In the case of dangerous tree removal replacement trees shall be 
planted during the wet weather season following the removal. 
5. Payment-in-lieu. The cost of payment-in-lieu of on-site tree replacement shall be determined by the 
City Council based upon the area of canopy loss for the removed trees, less than any canopy gain from 
the new plantings that were installed on site. Payment-in-lieu of replanting is only allowed if the City 
determines: 
a. There is insufficient area on the lot to meet the standard tree replacement standards in Section 
5.0208(B), or 
b. Tree replacement or management provided within public open space, public right-of-way or a 
nearby Resource Area will be of greater benefit to area slope stability. 
D. Programmatic Permit. Programmatic Permits may only be obtained by Public Agencies and Utilities with a 
Gresham franchise license to allow for routine public facility or utility operation, repair and replacement, 
and/or on-going maintenance or enhancement programs. The purpose of a Programmatic Permit is to 
eliminate the need for individual tree removal permits for ongoing activities within the HGRO. 
Programmatic permits do not cover tree protection, removal, planting, or mitigation associated with a 
development permit. 
1. Time Limits. The Manager may approve a Programmatic Permit for a period of up to two years. An 
annual report from the Applicant on activity conducted under the permit is required to be submitted 
to the Manager by June 30 each year. Failure to submit the annual report will result in  
cancellation/suspension of the Programmatic Permit. 
2. Work Standards. All work conducted under a programmatic permit must be conducted in accordance 
with proper arboricultural practices as detailed in the most recent version of ANSI A300 standards. 
3. Review Factors. The Manager may approve a Programmatic Permit for work in the HGRO and HSS 
upon finding that the following review factors are met or will be met with conditions, according to the 
Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual: 
 
 
[5.0200]-10 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
a. Biodiversity: The activities will result in the same or better species diversity within each project 
area treated under the programmatic permit. 
b. Erosion Control: Activities will be planned to prevent exposed soil areas of greater than 500 square 
feet during the wet weather window of October 1 to May 1. 
c. Mitigation of Impacts: The activities will protect or improve project area conditions as they relate 
to water quality, critical habitat protection, and forest health. 
d. Risk reduction: 
i. Ignition fuel reduction at the private-public property interface shall occur before any 
additional coarse woody debris (CWD) is placed as part of stand management activities. 
ii. CWD shall be placed in a manner not likely to increase wildfire, slope movement, or public 
safety risks. 
iii. Deciduous vegetation will be preferred for retention in defined firebreak areas. 
iv. Coniferous vegetation will not be planted in defined firebreak areas. 
v. Suspended branch material is addressed as part of site activities. 
vi. Allowance for amount and location limitations for cut or chipped CWD are observed. 
vii. Snags or habitat tree retention is incorporated into project areas where retention of such 
features poses no risk to structures or active use areas. 
viii. Within areas mapped as past landslides according to DOGAMI IMS-57, or mapped as HSS, a 
Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer must certify according to Section 
5.0207(C) that vegetation removal, with the exception of dangerous tree removal, or 
deposition of CWD will not increase geologic risk or otherwise cause negative impacts to 
onsite and offsite geologic conditions or processes. 
4. Application Requirements. The application requirements in Section 5.0207 do not apply. In addition to 
the requirements for a Type II application, an application for a programmatic permit shall include: 
a. A narrative description of proposed activities and locations. 
b. A map of the areas in which work will occur, including generalized locations of each type of work. 
c. Sufficient documentation to describe compliance with approval factors above. 
5. Permit Specifications. Approved permits issued by the City shall include the following specifications. 
The Manager may modify these specifications during the permit period in order to respond to public 
safety concerns, changes in regulations, or previously unforeseen issues, provided the Applicant is 
notified in writing and provided an opportunity to appeal the change: 
a. Duration of permit. 
b. Geographic area covered by the permit. 
c. Permitted activities and any restrictions on the method, number, type, location or timing of 
activities. 
d. Procedures and thresholds for informing neighboring residents, businesses and the City of 
upcoming permitted activities. 
e. Monitoring, performance tracking and reporting requirements. The Manager may prescribe rules 
or procedures that specify the manner in which such tracking and reporting occur. 
 
[5.0200]-11 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
6. Revocation. The Manager may revoke a Programmatic Permit upon finding the Applicant is not 
adhering to the limitations imposed or is acting beyond the activities permitted by the Programmatic 
Permit. Noncompliance with the Programmatic Permit may also be cause for any other enforcement 
action as stated in Section 5.0216. 
5.0209  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE HILLSIDE AND 
GEOLOGIC RISK OVERLAY (HGRO)   
In addition to other applicable standards in the code, the standards in this section apply to all regulated 
development within the HGRO. Development within the HGRO is also subject to the applicable standards for 
specific development types in Section 5.0210. In addition, development within the HSS is subject to the 
standards in Section 5.0211: 
A. Grading, Retaining Wall Design, Footings, Foundations, Changes to Site Drainage, Ponds, Pools, and Erosion 
Control Plans. All grading, retaining wall design, footings, foundations, changes to site drainage, ponds, 
pools, and erosion control plans for development within the HGRO shall be shown on site plan(s) and be 
designed by a licensed design professional and must be certified according to Section 5.0207(C) to be in 
accordance with the recommendations and guidelines provided by a Certified Engineering Geologist or 
Geotechnical Engineer. 
B. Clearing, Cuts, Grading, or Fills. Only land within an approved disturbance area shall be graded, cleared or 
otherwise disturbed. All cuts, grading, or fills shall conform to the International Building Code and be 
consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. Erosion control measures shall conform to the City of 
Gresham Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control (EPSC) requirements as included in the City of 
Gresham’s Stormwater Management Manual. Perimeter protection and protection of bare soils are 
required for ground disturbance exceeding 500 square feet. 
C. Trees and Vegetation. Tree and vegetation removal shall comply with the standards in Section 5.0208. 
D. Surface and Groundwater Drainage. All facilities for the collection of stormwater runoff for any 
development in the HGRO shall be required to be constructed on the site and in accordance with Section 
9.0500 and the following requirements: 
1. Stormwater systems which infiltrate shall not be utilized within the HGRO except as provided in 
Subsection 2, below. 
2. A Type II Alternate Review may be approved pursuant to Section 5.0213 if a Certified Engineering 
Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer certifies according to Section 5.0207(C) that geologic conditions, 
processes, and hazards onsite and offsite will not be negatively impacted by the proposed infiltration 
of stormwater on the site. 
5.0210  STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT TYPES WITHIN THE HILLSIDE 
AND GEOLOGIC RISK OVERLAY (HGRO)   
The addition to the general development standards in Section 5.0209, the standards in this section are 
applicable to specified types of development. 
 
 
 
[5.0200]-12 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
A. Single detached dwellings and middle housing. The following standards apply to proposed single detached 
dwellings and middle housing and to additions or alterations of existing single detached dwellings and 
middle housing and related accessory structures on existing legal lots created prior to January 15, 2021 
unless otherwise exempt under Section 5.0205.  
The disturbance area allowed within the HGRO shall meet the following standards: 
1. The maximum disturbance area allowed on a lot is determined by subtracting all portions of the lot 
outside the HGRO from 6,000 square feet. If there is 6,000 square feet of contiguous land with a 
minimum depth and width of at least 40 feet outside of the HGRO, all permanent and temporary 
disturbance must occur outside the HGRO. If there is not a contiguous area of 6,000 square feet with a 
depth and width of at least 40 feet outside the HGRO, encroachment into HGRO shall be limited to the 
amount of area needed to make up for the deficit. 
2. The disturbance area must be entirely outside the HSS except as provided in Section 5.0212. 
3. Of the 6,000 square feet maximum disturbance area, no more than 4,000 square feet shall be 
permanent disturbance area. 
4. Trees may be removed within the permanent disturbance area. Only trees less than 24-inch DBH may 
be removed in the temporary disturbance area. Replacement shall be in accordance with Section 
5.0208. 
5. Temporary disturbance areas shall be restored to pre-development grade. 
6. On lots where existing developed areas meeting the definition of permanent disturbance area exceed 
the standards of this subsection, such areas can be maintained or modified, but may not be expanded. 
B. Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments. The following standards apply to all land divisions (including 
Planned Developments) and Lot Line Adjustments. 
1. No density credit is permitted for portions of the site that are within the HGRO, except through a 
Planned Development, as provided by Section 6.0300. 
2. On each proposed developable lot, Applicants shall identify a contiguous permanent disturbance area 
of at least 2,000 square feet with a minimum depth and width of at least 40 feet. Larger permanent 
and temporary disturbance areas may be shown on a lot, but all disturbance areas shall be included in 
the calculation of maximum disturbance area in Subsection (3). 
3. No more than 55 percent of the total HGRO area on the site shall be included within a disturbance 
area (temporary and permanent). The disturbance area identified on each proposed developable lot 
shall be included in the calculation of maximum disturbance area for the land division or Planned 
Development. In order to meet this requirement, Applicants are encouraged to employ innovative site 
design techniques such as: 
• Limiting grading on building lots only to that area needed for driveways, walkways, building pads, 
and necessary retaining walls, 
• Limiting the total area of the site dedicated to roadways and paths while maintaining adequate 
connectivity and providing for adequate emergency access consistent with the roadway standards, 
• Locating roads and paths on less steeply sloped areas to minimize the width of graded areas 
needed for roads, 
 
 
[5.0200]-13 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
• Designing and locating structures so that they fit into the contour of the hillside rather than 
altering the hillside to fit the structure, 
• Using retaining structures as an alternative to banks of cuts and fills, 
• Building designs, which require less grading, such as split-level and stair-stepping foundations and 
the use of piers, 
• Placing structures as close as possible to the street so as to minimize driveway construction in the 
sloped areas, and 
• Focusing development on areas outside the HGRO. 
4. All disturbance areas must be entirely outside the Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) except as provided in 
Section 5.0212. 
5. Areas outside the permanent disturbance area shall be placed in an easement (public or private) or 
tract. If preservation is proposed to be private, it can be either by tract or as a part of an individual lot 
(with an easement). Public preservation shall be by tract only. Easement types shall be Natural 
Resource and Watershed, Open Space, or Public Access, in accordance with Section 9.0300 provided 
that the easement ensures that the land within the easement shall be left undisturbed and protected 
from construction and post-development impacts. Acceptance of proposed dedication of an easement 
or tract shall be at the City’s discretion. 
C. Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional Development. The following standards apply to all 
Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional development. 
1. No more than 55 percent of the total HGRO area on the site shall be included within a disturbance 
area (temporary and permanent). In order to meet this requirement, Applicants are encouraged to 
employ innovative site design techniques such as: 
• Limiting grading to that area needed for driveways, walkways, building pads, minimum parking, 
solid waste collection facilities and necessary retaining walls. 
• Limiting the total area of the site dedicated to roadways, paths, and internal driveways while 
maintaining adequate connectivity and providing for adequate emergency access consistent with 
the roadway and parking lot standards. 
• Locating roads, paths, parking lots, and internal driveways on less steeply sloped areas to minimize 
the width of graded areas needed for roads. 
• Designing and locating structures so that they fit into the contour of the hillside rather than 
altering the hillside to fit the structure. 
• Using retaining structures as an alternative to banks of cuts and fills. 
• Placing structures as close as possible to the street so as to minimize driveway construction in the 
sloped areas. 
• Focusing development on areas outside the HGRO. 
2. All disturbance areas must be entirely outside the Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) except as provided in 
Section 5.0212. 
 
 
[5.0200]-14 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
5.0211  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HIGHLY SLOPED 
SUBAREAS (HSS)   
The HSS is a subarea of the HGRO. In addition to the general development standards in Section 5.0210 and the 
applicable development standards in Section 5.0211, the standards of this section apply to regulated 
development within HSS. 
A. Prohibited Uses. Triplex, Quadplex, Townhouses, and Cottage Clusters are prohibited in HSS. 
B. Single detached and duplexes. The following standards apply to proposed single detached dwellings, 
duplexes, and additions or alterations of existing single detached dwellings, duplexes, and related 
accessory structures located in the HSS either on existing legal lots that were created prior to January 15, 
2021 or which were created through a PD in accordance with Section (B). The disturbance area allowed 
within the HSS shall meet the following standards. 
1. The maximum disturbance area (permanent and temporary) allowed within the HSS is determined by 
subtracting all portions of the lot outside the HSS from 2,000 square feet. If there is an area of 2,000 
contiguous square feet at least 40 feet in width and depth outside of the HSS, all permanent and 
temporary disturbance must occur outside the HSS. If there is not 2,000 square feet of land outside the 
HSS, encroachment into HSS shall be limited to the amount of area needed to make up for the deficit. 
2. On lots where existing developed areas meeting the definition of permanent disturbance area exceed 
the standards of this subsection, such areas can be maintained and modified but may not be 
expanded. 
C. Land Divisions and Lot Line Adjustments. The following standards apply to all land divisions (including 
Planned Developments) and Lot Line Adjustments. 
1. No new lots which include HSS shall be created except through a Planned Development (PD). 
2. The following standards apply to all Planned Developments that include HSS. 
a. Permanent disturbance areas may include HSS only when the PD is 10 acres or more in size; 
b. No more than 30 percent of the total HSS on the site may be included within permanent 
disturbance; and 
c. A Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer must certify (according to Subsection 
5.0207(C)) that disturbance area within the HSS are not susceptible to earth movement nor 
landslide hazard; and the proposed construction and design techniques will minimize cuts, fills, 
and potential adverse impacts to existing vegetation and have no adverse impacts to existing 
drainage ways, water quality, and slope stability. 
D. Open Space Improvements. Open spaces may be improved with private walking/hiking trails, or with 
public paths or trails. Public paths or trails shall be limited to public open spaces, and private trails or paths 
shall be limited to private open spaces. 
E. Public Facilities and Utilities. Public facilities (including streets) and utilities are not allowed within the 
Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) except through the HGRO Alternative Review process as provided in Section 
5.0212. 
F. Technical Review. When a Geotechnical Report or Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis is submitted 
it shall be reviewed by a third-party reviewer. The Manager shall select and consult with a Geotechnical 
Engineer and/or Certified Engineering Geologist to evaluate the methodology, conclusions, and 
 
[5.0200]-15 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
recommendations of the Applicant’s submittals regarding site conditions and potential geologic hazards. 
The consultant for the City may conduct a site visit prior to submitting an evaluation to the City. The 
written evaluation and recommendation from the City’s consultant shall include an evaluation regarding 
the following: 
• The acceptability of the observations, procedure, data, reports, methods, and assumptions relied 
upon, and 
• The support of the conclusions and recommendations by evidence provided. 
If required, the written evaluation and recommendation from the City’s Consultant shall be received prior 
to a recommendation for a Type III process, or before a decision for a Type II process. Costs for such 
consultation shall be paid by the Applicant, in accordance with the City of Gresham’s Development Fee 
Resolution. 
PROCESS  
5.0212  ALTERNATE REVIEW  
Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards of Section 5.0209, 5.0210, or 5.0211, may 
apply for Alternative Review in accordance with this Section. 
A. Application Requirements. In addition to the items described in Section 5.0208 (further clarified in the 
Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual), the Applicant shall also provide information 
described in Subsections (1) through (3) and any additional information needed to demonstrate 
compliance with the approval criteria in Subsection B. For utility projects undertaken by public utilities 
across property that is not owned by the utility, the utility is not required to map or provide any 
information about the property except for the area within 100 feet of the location of the proposed 
disturbance area of the utility’s project. 
1. Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis. An impact evaluation and alternatives analysis is required 
to determine compliance with the approval criteria and to evaluate development alternatives for a 
particular property. At a minimum, the analysis should evaluate three alternatives: 1) no project, 2) the 
applicant’s preferred alternative, and 3) a second practicable alternative that proposes less 
development within HGRO and HSS. The impact evaluation shall include all the following items: 
a. Identification of on- and off-site engineering geological conditions, processes, and hazards. 
b. An explanation of proposed unavoidable impacts to on and offsite engineering geological 
conditions, processes, and hazards. 
c. Evaluation of alternative locations, design modifications, or alternative methods of development 
to determine which option best reduces the impacts on the HGRO provided on the property. 
2. The Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis shall be prepared and signed by a Geotechnical 
Engineer and/or Certified Engineering Geologist and shall meet the current standard of practice.  
B. Public Facilities and Utilities. 
1. When the applicant demonstrates through the alternatives analysis that either (a) and/or (b) below 
will reduce the amount of HGRO which will be disturbed. The City may approve an alternate that: 
 
 
[5.0200]-16 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
a. Adjusts the “minimum block spacing and maximum block perimeter standards for local queuing 
and transitional street types in Section A5.501 by up to 50 percent. 
b. Adjust the standard street cross section within the HSS to omit the median, parking lane, and 
landscape strip, or combination thereof. 
2. The City may approve public facilities not meeting the standards of Section 5.0211(E), if it determines 
that the street location is necessary to provide street connectivity or for emergency vehicle access. 
Public facilities (including streets) and utilities may be constructed if the following is certified according 
to Section 5.0207(C) by a Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer: 
a. That these facilities can be constructed given the geologic and topographic conditions of the area 
of development, and 
b. That these facilities can be constructed in a manner that does not increase the risk of earth 
movement or erosion. 
C. All other development. The City may approve an application which does not comply with the clear and 
objective standards of this code if the applicant shows through the Impact Evaluation and Alternatives 
Analysis that the following conditions are met: 
1. The applicant shows that the development has less detrimental impact to the slope than development 
meeting the standards would. If there is HSS on a property then the Applicant shall first avoid the 
intrusion of development into the HSS, to the extent practicable. 
2. A Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer certifies according to Section 5.0207(C) 
that the proposed alternative (including consideration of any proposed mitigation) will not increase 
the risk of earth movement or landslide hazard; and the proposed construction and design techniques 
will minimize cuts, fills and potential adverse impacts to existing vegetation and have no adverse 
impacts to existing drainage ways, water quality and slope stability. 
D. Additional disturbance on flat land. When a land division is proposed which includes a contiguous area of 
HGRO at least an acre in size located on a DOGAMI mapped landslide deposit and which is comprised of 
slope less than 15 percent, such area can be exempted from of 5.0210(B)(3). Such an application is not 
required to submit the Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis of Section 5.0212(A) however, it shall 
be accompanied by: 
1. A slope analysis showing the area with slopes of less than 15 percent. Areas shall be identified using 
raster analysis of the LiDAR-derived Bare-Earth DEM created as part of the Oregon LiDAR Consortium 
Metro 2014 Project. The DEM is processed to reflect percent slope rise and then slope is averaged for 
each cell across a 45-foot radius circle. Cells with an average surrounding slope of 15 percent or less 
are included. 
2. A soils and geology report of sufficient detail to describe the geologic conditions of the parcel and 
immediate vicinity and evaluate the potential geologic hazards associated with the site and prepared 
by Geotechnical Engineer and/or Certified Engineering Geologist. The report must meet current 
standard of practice and contain: 
• A review of the geologic history and history of prior excavation and fills 
• Field reconnaissance of the site and its vicinity 
 
 
 
[5.0200]-17 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
• Scope of work done, investigative methods, sampling methods, logs of borings or test pits, 
elevations of borings or test pits for reference of materials and samples to finished grade or 
footing elevations, and the identification of the elevations 
• Location of all samples taken, surface and subsurface 
• Groundwater conditions and potential future natural and artificial seepage effects 
• (USCM) Unified Soil Classifications of Materials 
• Material competency and strength of the existing soils 
• Pertinent engineering geologic attributes (clayey, weak, loose, alignments, fissility, planar 
boundaries, pervious or water-bearing parts, susceptibility to mass wasting, erosion, piping or 
compressibility) 
• Bearing capacity and/or shear strength of sample areas 
• Consolidation or settlement potential 
• Expansion potential 
5.0213  MODIFICATION OF HGRO STANDARDS  
Where the compliance with the HGRO would cause unreasonable hardship, applicants may seek a Type II 
Minor Variance or a Type III Major Variance pursuant to Section 10.1500. 
5.0214  HGRO MAPPING PROTOCOLS  
The boundaries of the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) and Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) are based on 
a GIS-supported application of the following mapping protocols. All buffer measurements are based on 
horizontal distance rather than a slope distance. 
A. The HGRO includes all lands with the following attributes: 
1. The boundaries of the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) and Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) are 
based on a GIS-supported application of the following mapping protocols. All buffer measurements are 
based on horizontal distance rather than a slope distance. 
2. Deep Landslide Hazards – All lands identified in IMS-57 as having high or moderate susceptibility to 
deep landslide hazards. 
3. Shallow Landslide Hazards – Prioritized concentrations of lands identified an IMS-57 raster dataset as 
having high susceptibility to shallow landslide hazards. Prioritized concentrations were determined 
using further mapping protocols as follows: 
a. Edit the hazard raster to remove the following lands: 
i. Lands with prioritized hazard areas that represent temporary slope features that are not 
longer present, such as stockpiles that have been removed. 
ii. Areas of hazard inaccurately identified due to underlying LiDAR-derived Bare-Earth Digital 
Elevation Model (DEM) (created as part of the 2014 Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 2014 
Project) data quality issues, such as uncommonly low spots or “pits” caused by atmospheric 
interference. Acceptable quality levels are established by the 2014 Oregon LiDAR Consortium 
Metro 2014 Project. 
 
[5.0200]-18 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
iii. Existing stormwater ponds unless in, or within 100 feet of, the HSS. 
iv. Concentrations of hazards on lands with an average slope less than 15 percent, except within 
200 feet of a mapped stream. Average slope is calculated across a 120-foot radius circle for 
each slope raster cell (using Focal Statistics). 
b. Perform raster analysis to prioritize resultant hazard data where at least one-third of surrounding 
cells within a 45-foot radius circle were also designated as high risk (using Focal Statistics). 
c. Remove lands with prioritized hazard areas less than 6,000 square feet in area when located more 
than 200 feet away from a mapped stream. 
d. Buffer resultant prioritized concentrations by 30 feet. 
4. Butte tops – All lands 700 feet above sea level or higher. 
5. Gaps – Resultant gaps of less than 55,000 square feet after combining the above lands. 
6. Excluded areas – The following lands were excluded: 
a. Lands regulated by DOGAMI for surface mining. 
b. Lands north of NE Glisan Street 
B. Highly Sloped Subarea (HSS) includes all lands within the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay with the 
following attributes: 
1. Lands with concentrations of slopes of 35 percent or greater. Concentrations are identified using raster 
analysis of the LiDAR-derived Bare-Earth DEM created as part of the Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 
2014 Project. The DEM is processed into percent slope rise and then slope is averaged for each cell 
across the surrounding cells within a 45-foot radius circle. Cells with an average surrounding slope of 
35 percent or greater are included. Prior to analysis, the DEM is edited to remove the following lands: 
a. Lands that represent temporary slope features that are no longer present. 
b. Areas with underlying DEM data quality issues. 
2. Lands within 5 feet of areas identified in accordance with Subsection (1). 
5.0215  HGRO MAP ADMINISTRATION AND CORRECTION  
A. Map Administration. The City shall incorporate all map updates associated with development permit 
applications and corrections to the location of the HSS and HGRO, as necessary. This shall be processed 
under a Type I procedure and is not considered a comprehensive plan map amendment. 
B. Map Corrections. All Applicants who believe that the HGRO and/or HSS was mapped based upon incorrect 
data may file a verification request consistent with this Subsection, and as described in the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. Verification requests will be processed under the Type I 
development permit procedure. 
1. HGRO Boundary. Applicants may request a site-specific correction of the HGRO boundary and the City 
shall incorporate such corrections to the HGRO using the protocols in Section 5.0214 with 
modifications to the input data allowed under the following scenarios: 
a. DEM Data Issues: Data issues with the Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 2014 Project Bare-Earth 
DEM used in the creation of DOGAMI IMS-57 Shallow Landslide Susceptibility Hazard raster may be 
addressed where provided for here. Such issues must be delineated to within 3 feet of the data 
 
[5.0200]-19 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
issue(s) and submitted as an ESRI Shapefile (polygon) accompanied by two maps and a narrative. 
The narrative must describe the data errors in detail and methods for mapping them. The two 
maps must delineate the data issues at a scale of no less than 1-inch to 100 feet. One map must 
show the data issue(s), current HGRO boundary, and the Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 2014 
Project Bare-Earth DEM. A second map must show the data issue(s), current HGRO boundary, and 
the DOGAMI IMS-57 Shallow Landslide Susceptibility High hazard data. The following DEM Data 
Issues may be addressed: 
i. Temporary Slope Features. Lands with prioritized hazard areas that represent temporary slope 
features that are no longer present, such as stockpiles that have been removed, may be 
extracted from the Shallow Landslide Hazard dataset. 
ii. DEM Data Quality Issues: Areas of hazard inaccurately identified due to underlying LiDAR-
derived Bare-Earth Digital Elevation Model (DEM) data quality issues related to structures may 
be extracted from the Shallow Landslide Hazard Dataset. Acceptable data quality issues are 
those defined in the “Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 2014 Lidar Project Quality Control 
Report – November 30, 2016” and which are related to structures. The data issue narrative 
must identify the specific data quality issue(s) for each polygon submitted. 
b. Mapped Stream Changes: Mapped stream changes incorporated through Section 5.0715(C) (NRO 
Map Corrections). 
c. Newly mapped landslide(s): Newly mapped landslide deposit(s) and scarp flank(s) which have been 
mapped by a Registered Geologist or Certified Engineering Geologist. 
2. HSS Boundary. Applicants may request a site-specific correction of the HSS boundary by providing on-
site slope survey data, new HSS boundary, and an HSS analysis map prepared in accordance with the 
following: 
a. On-site survey data: A survey shall be submitted of the natural/existing topography for the site of 
the proposed area of correction and a 50-foot buffer around it, stamped by a registered Civil 
Engineer or licensed Land Surveyor. If access in the 50-foot buffer cannot be acquired, data from 
the Oregon LiDAR Consortium Metro 2014 Project Bare-Earth DEM may be substituted. Survey 
data must be provided as bare-earth DEM raster as well as a percent slope raster calculated using 
the bare-earth DEM. Survey data must meet or exceed standards set in “Oregon LiDAR Consortium 
Metro 2014 Lidar Project Quality Control Report – November 30, 2016” including an absolute 
vertical error of less than 0.20 meters. 
b. New HSS boundary data: The new slope raster must be processed according to the mapping 
protocol in Section 5.0214(B) and provided as a raster dataset. 
c. HSS analysis map: A map shall be provided having a scale of not less than 1-inch to 100 feet and a 
contour interval of not more than 10 feet with two-foot intermediates. The map shall also indicate 
the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the slope analysis and shall attest to the 
fact that the slope analysis has been accurately calculated. The map shall clearly delineate/identify 
the slopes of 35 percent or greater and new HSS boundary. The map shall be prepared using CAD-
based, GIS-based, or other type of software specifically designed for such purpose. 
d. Raster data requirements: Raster datasets must be provided as outlined in the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
 
[5.0200]-20 
City of Gresham Development Code  (06/26) 
5.0216  VIOLATIONS  
A. Actions that violate the HGRO regulations are subject to the abatement and penalty provisions of Section 
2.0008 of the Gresham Community Development Code. The following activities shall be considered 
immediate hazards: 
1. Unpermitted work in the HSS, 
2. Dumping, 
3. Depositing any material on public property, 
4. Bare earth over 500 square feet during the wet weather period of October 1 to May 1, and 
5. Other situations as determined by the Manager. 
B. Unpermitted alterations will not be deemed valid buildable/developable area. 
C. For correcting violations regarding unauthorized activity, the responsible party must submit and ensure 
implementation of a remediation plan that meets all applicable standards of the HGRO. The plan must be 
developed by an Oregon licensed Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer. 
D. For correcting violations regarding unauthorized activity, the responsible party shall submit an application 
that meets all applicable standards of the HGRO including appropriate mitigation if applicable. 
E. The plan must be developed by an Oregon licensed Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical 
Engineer. 
 