Chapter 17.22

OP—OFFICE PARK DISTRICT

Sections:

17.22.010 Purpose.

17.22.020 Primary uses.

17.22.030 Accessory uses.

17.22.040 Conditional uses.

17.22.050 Prohibited and nonconforming uses.

17.22.060 Dimensional standards.

17.22.070 Development standards.

17.22.010 Purpose.

This section is adopted to implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan for industrial areas for high technology and other clean, light industry, research facilities, and office uses needing sites with high aesthetic standards. The provisions of this section are intended to:

(1) Establish and maintain high aesthetic standards and preserve the natural beauty of the district.

(2) Assure that improvements are appropriately related to their sites, and to surrounding developments.

(3) Enhance the value of sites and developments located within each office park district.

(4) Implement the policies and objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Plan.

(5) Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in site planning and development, including architecture, landscaping and graphic design.

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.020 Primary uses.

(1) Uses. The following uses may be established when they satisfy the purposes of this district, and performance standards under subsections (2) through (8) of this section:

(a) Research. Research offices and laboratories, including testing facilities, provided such testing complies with the operational impact standards set forth under subsection (8) of this section;

(b) Business and professional offices;

(c) Manufacturing uses. Any manufacturing or assembly use, except primary processing of raw materials;

(d) Retail and service uses listed as uses permitted outright in the C-2 community commercial zoning district, including day care centers;

(e) Conversion of a building from commercial to residential;

(f) Dwelling units available to households making 60 percent or less of area median income;

(g) Mixed-use development with ground floor commercial available to households with moderate incomes as defined in ORS 456.270 (80 to 120 percent AMI).

(2) Site Plan and Design. Structures, circulation, parking, loading, and landscaping shall be designed to:

(a) Avoid undue disturbance of significant vegetation, slopes and lakes;

(b) Incorporate and use significant natural features to enhance the quality of the development and preserve the visual character of the site;

(c) Project a positive image as viewed from both inside and outside the site; and

(d) Minimize the impact of truck loading and maneuvering areas.

(3) Building Types and Designs. The use shall occupy only the types of buildings described below:

(a) Buildings. Architect-designed buildings which have the following characteristics:

(A) Are designed for the specific site to accomplish the objectives under subsection (2) of this section;

(B) Provide for natural light penetration into work areas using windows, skylights, atriums, courtyards, etc.;

(C) Have distinctive public entrances into the building;

(D) Use high-image exterior materials and finishes such as masonry, architecturally treated tilt-up concrete, glass, wood, or stucco;

(E) Do not use metal siding material, except as approved by the design review committee for specific high-image materials, or for canopies, awnings, screening for roof-mounted fixtures, or other architectural features;

(F) Generally provide limited area (not exceeding 20 percent of the floor area) devoted exclusively to storage, except those uses requiring additional storage area for materials and finished products assembled within the same building, or uses providing storage and retrieval of records or information, and similar uses;

(G) Are designed to accommodate either a number of tenants in one structure, or a single tenant having various space needs, such as office, research, assembly and storage.

(4) Outdoor Storage/Process Areas. No outdoor storage of materials or products is allowed. No outdoor processes shall be employed in the operation of the business. Waste and recycle receptacles shall be maintained within enclosed structures.

(5) Display Areas. All display areas shall be located within an office, multi-use or flex-space building. No outdoor display areas are allowed in this district.

(6) Transportation Requirements. The use provides appropriate access to a road of at least a collector classification. In addition, the following provisions apply:

(a) Parking. The use satisfies the parking requirements under GMC Chapter 17.48 (Off-Street Parking and Loading), and parking area landscaping requirements under GMC Chapter 17.46 (Landscaping).

(b) Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be located to the side or rear of the buildings unless topography, natural features, or other requirements of this section dictate front yard loading bays. Loading dock areas shall be recessed, screened, or otherwise designed to buffer this use from adjacent properties and roads.

(7) Landscaping. A minimum of 20 percent of the developed “site area,” as defined under GMC Section 17.22.060, shall be used for landscaping, satisfying the requirements under GMC Chapter 17.46 (Landscaping). Typical landscaping in this district shall:

(a) Include a variety of plant materials;

(b) Highlight public access points to buildings;

(c) Buffer loading and utility areas;

(d) Break up large parking areas;

(e) Complement building design and materials;

(f) Incorporate significant trees and other natural features into the site as much as possible;

(g) Include street trees along periphery and internal circulation roads except where significant trees already exist;

(h) Provide for maintenance of all areas within the site area, including areas for future development.

(8) Operational Impacts.

(a) The operation of the use shall not produce noise, odors, fumes, gases, or vibration which exceed the standards of the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ);

(b) No hazardous materials in quantities classified under Group H, Division 1 or Division 2 Occupancies under the International Building Code shall be stored or used on the premises, except as specifically approved as a conditional use under GMC Section 17.22.040 (Conditional uses);

(c) Any use which generates, releases, stores, or deposits hazardous substances, as defined by CERCLA, 42 USC Chapter 9601 (14), pollutants or contaminates as defined in CERCLA, 12 USC Chapter 9604 (a)(2), or hazardous wastes as defined by RCRA, 42 USC Chapter 6903 (5) (“Hazardous Substance”) shall be allowed only under a conditional use under GMC Section 17.22.040 (Conditional uses).

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1281 §1, 1998; Ord. 1306 §1, 2001; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.030 Accessory uses.

The following shall be allowed as accessory uses in the office park district:

(1) Incidental Uses. Structures and uses customarily accessory and incidental to a primary use, such as:

(a) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work which will be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work;

(b) Street furniture and bus shelters;

(c) Solar collection apparatus meeting all the dimensional and development standards of this district;

(d) Satellite dishes, provided such use is buffered from periphery and internal circulation roads;

(e) Utility carrier cabinets;

(f) Cafeterias, employee lounges, and indoor recreation areas and facilities;

(g) Outdoor recreational facilities for employees, such as tennis courts, jogging and exercise courses, playing fields, and similar uses;

(h) Signs identifying the developer, contractor, or real estate agency responsible for leasing or selling land or buildings within the project, which shall be removed upon sale or lease of the premises advertised;

(i) Parking and loading structures and areas provided in conjunction with a primary use, subject to the provisions of GMC Sections 17.22.020(6), 17.48.030 (standards for developments subject to design review) and 17.48.040 (design requirements for permanent off-street parking and loading areas);

(j) Indoor areas for display and sale of products manufactured by the same business occupying the premises; provided, that the floor area of such display area constitutes no more than 20 percent of the floor area of the primary use.

(2) Warehouse Structures. Within a planned office park site area occupying at least 10 acres, separate warehouse or storage structures in conjunction with a primary use may be developed concurrently with or after the primary use; provided, that:

(a) The warehouse structure is located on a site with easy access to periphery roads where impacts on other uses may be minimized, and such use satisfies the loading area requirements under GMC Section 17.22.020(6)(b);

(b) Such structures are compatible with the primary use structure(s) on the site in the use of materials and design.

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.040 Conditional uses.

(1) Criteria. Conditional uses may be established in an office park district subject to review and action on the specific proposal, pursuant to GMC Chapter 17.70 (conditional uses). Approval shall not be granted unless the proposal satisfies the following criteria:

(a) The use will have minimal adverse impact on the development of primary uses on abutting properties and the surrounding area, considering location, size, design and operating characteristics of the use;

(b) The use will not create offensive odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, glare, heat, vibrations, or truck traffic which are incompatible with primary uses allowed in this district;

(c) The use will be located on a site occupied by a primary use, and/or in a structure which is compatible with the character and scale of uses allowed within the district;

(d) The use will provide vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation, parking and loading areas which are compatible with similar facilities for uses on the same site or adjacent sites.

(2) Uses. The following uses are allowed subject to the above conditions:

(a) Heliports;

(b) Uses which satisfy the provisions under GMC Section 17.22.020(1), but require the storage or use of potentially hazardous materials in quantities classified under Group H, Division 1 or Division 2 Occupancies under the International Building Code, or involve hazardous substances as defined by CERCLA or RCRA or otherwise exceed the requirements of GMC Section 17.22.020(8);

(c) Day care centers;

(d) Business or vocational schools and college or university extension facilities;

(e) Utility substations necessary to serve the surrounding area, without maintenance shops.

(f) Senior housing center; provided, that the use is adjacent to a perimeter access road and across the road from a different zoning district and provided that the use shall occupy no more than 15 percent of the OP site as it exists on the effective date of this amendment.

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1306 §2, 2001; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.050 Prohibited and nonconforming uses.

(1) Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in an OP zoning district:

(a) Uses that do not comply with the physical and operational requirements specified under GMC Section 17.22.020 (Primary uses) shall be prohibited, except as specifically provided under GMC Section 17.22.040 (conditional uses);

(b) Separate warehouse and distribution structures and activities, except as allowed as an accessory use under GMC Section 17.22.030(2);

(c) Motor freight terminal;

(d) Auto or truck storage or repair.

(2) Nonconforming Uses.

(a) Structures that are part of a nonconforming use may be allowed to remodel or expand subject to GMC Chapter 17.76 (Exceptions).

(b) Any change in the use of an existing structure from a nonconforming use to a primary, accessory or conditional use allowed in an OP zoning district shall be subject to all requirements for new developments.

(c) Lot Divisions and Setbacks.

(A) A new lot created for a structure that is part of a nonconforming use shall have no minimum lot size;

(B) Structures that are part of a nonconforming use shall satisfy the OP zoning district setback requirements from new lot lines.

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1323 §1, 2002; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.060 Dimensional standards.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of these requirements and limitations is to:

(a) Assure that developments have a positive image and attractive appearance from within the site, and from public roads and adjacent properties;

(b) Encourage the retention of large sites and their development in a coordinated, aesthetic, and efficient manner;

(c) Ensure that the minimum operational requirements of the development are provided on-site;

(d) Establish the maximum limits of development;

(e) Provide for the safety and welfare of property within and adjacent to the site.

(2) Site Area Requirements. A “site area” for purposes of this section shall be the total land area to be developed as a unit prior to the creation of any new parcels or lots within the land area. A site area may be either of the following:

(a) A single tax lot, or two or more contiguous tax lots under the same ownership;

(b) Two or more contiguous tax lots under separate ownership; provided, that:

(A) All individual property owners are members of a group formed for the purposes of developing the properties as a single planned development, and

(B) All individual tax lot ownerships are converted into development shares, or other satisfactory arrangement, allowing all lots to be combined into one lot prior to issuance of any building permit for the project.

(3) Site Area Standards. The following standards shall apply to office park districts:

(a) Site Area. Developments shall require a minimum site area of five acres.

(b) Site Area Partitions and Subdivisions. Design review approval of the overall development plan for the site area, including circulation, parking, landscaping, and proposed building elevations, shall be required prior to the approval of any partition or subdivisions of a site area existing at the time of application of this district to the property.

(4) Setback Requirements. For purposes of this section, a “perimeter access road” shall be any state, county, or public road which provides access to the site area, and an “internal circulation road” shall be any public or private roadway which provides direct access to more than one use, building, or parcel within a site area but not including connecting driveways within or between parking areas.

(a) Perimeter Access Road Setbacks. A minimum 30-foot setback shall be maintained between structures in a development and any perimeter access road, except:

(A) An additional five feet of setback shall be added for each five feet, or portion thereof, of building height over 35 feet;

(B) No structure shall be erected closer than 55 feet from the center line of a perimeter access road.

(b) Perimeter Side and Rear Yard Setbacks. A 20-foot setback shall be provided between any structure and a side or rear perimeter line;

(c) Internal Site Setbacks. A 20-foot setback shall be provided between buildings within a site area, and between any building and an internal circulation road.

(d) Corner Lots. A structure located on the corner of two roads shall observe the minimum setback requirement for both roads, as prescribed in this section;

(e) Perimeter Landscaping. Within the perimeter setback, a landscaped strip at least 20 feet wide shall be provided.

(f) A setback does not apply to portable storage containers as defined in GMC Chapter 5.22.

(5) Minimum Street Frontage. A site area shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a state, county, or public perimeter access road.

(6) Building Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This restriction may be varied as follows:

(a) Maximum building height may be increased by one story if the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system throughout as provided in Section 506 of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code or its successor;

(b) Vertical projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, towers, aerials, flagpoles and similar objects not used for human occupancy are exempt from the maximum building height standard;

(c) Maximum building height may be increased if the city fire department reports that it possesses sufficient fire-fighting capability to provide emergency response to a structure of the height proposed.

(7) Exceptions to General Requirements. The requirements of this section may be modified when such modification is consistent with GMC Section 17.22.060(1) and GMC Chapter 17.72 (Variances).

Statutory Reference: ORS Ch. 197, Ch. 227

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1140 §3, 1991; Ord. 1323 §1, 2002; Ord. 1392 § 8, 2007; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.

17.22.070 Development standards.

All development within an OP zoning district shall be subject to the development standards of GMC Section 17.22.020. In addition, the following standards shall apply:

(1) Master Plan. All developments within the office park district shall be reviewed and developed under a master plan which addresses the performance standards of this section and GMC Chapter 17.80 (Design Review).

(2) Specific Area Plans or Standards. Development shall comply with the requirements or provisions of any special design, circulation, community plan, or standards adopted by the City Council for the area.

(3) Fences. Street perimeter fences or walls and guard posts shall meet a minimum setback of 30 feet and shall be of a material, color, and design complementary to the development and to adjoining properties and public access roads.

(4) Signs. The master plan for the development shall include all proposed signs. In addition to the standards of GMC Chapter 17.52 (Signs), the following sign provisions shall apply. Where the standards of GMC Chapter 17.52 (Signs) conflict with the sign standards of this chapter, the standards of this chapter shall apply.

(a) Freestanding Identification Signs. One sign oriented toward off-site traffic may be provided at each public access point from a public street. Such signs shall comply with the following requirements:

(A) Shall not exceed 50 square feet in area;

(B) Shall not exceed eight feet in height;

(C) Shall use materials and design elements that are complementary to those used in the development;

(D) May be internally or indirectly illuminated;

(E) Shall not be required to maintain a setback from any property line except where such property line abuts a residential zoning district or abuts a street where property on the opposite side of the street is in a residential zoning district, in which cases the minimum setback shall be 15 feet. In no case shall a setback be required from any property line abutting Interstate 205.

(b) Directories. Signs that identify multiple tenants, buildings or uses within a development and direct on-site vehicular or pedestrian traffic to such tenants, buildings or uses shall be allowed. In contrast to signs regulated by GMC Section 17.22.070(4)(a), directories shall clearly be oriented toward on-site vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The maximum area allowed for a directory oriented primarily toward on-site vehicle circulation shall be 50 square feet. The maximum area allowed for a directory oriented primarily toward pedestrian circulation shall be 24 square feet. The maximum area for a directory may be increased if, through review pursuant to GMC Chapter 17.80 (Design Review), it is found that the increase is necessary due to the number of tenants, buildings or uses to be identified.

(c) Monument Signs. A monument sign to identify an individual building in a development shall be allowed provided such sign shall:

(A) Be located in front of the building being identified;

(B) Not exceed 16 square feet in area;

(C) Not exceed five feet in height;

(D) Use materials and colors that are the same, or substantially the same, as those used on the building identified by the sign.

Statutory Reference: ORS Chs. 197, 227.

History: Ord. 1131 §2, 1990; Ord. 1140 §3, 1991; Ord. 1323 §1, 2002; Ord. 1392 § 8, 2007; Ord. 1535 §1 (Exh. A), 2024.
