501-1 Intent and Purpose
The intent of this Section is to identify those public facilities and services that are
necessary at a minimum level to accommodate development authorized by
Article III and Article VI. The standards of this Section are not applicable to uses
authorized by Article VII unless specifically required by Article VII.
501-2 Application of the Public Facility and Service Standards Inside an Urban
Growth Boundary
Application of the Public Facility and Service Standards (Section 501-1 through
501-13) shall apply to the Urban Unincorporated Area as follows:
501-2.1 To all Standard Land Divisions, Middle Housing Land Divisions and property line
adjustments, except:
A. Land Divisions where each resulting lot or parcel measures 10 acres or
greater, except as required by Subsection 501-8.5; or
B. As otherwise specified for a property line adjustment under Article VI.
501-2.2 To any new structure or expansion of an existing structure, except as otherwise
indicated below:
A. A Single Detached Dwelling Unit (one only) on a lot that is not subject to
conditions of a Standard Land Division, expansion or replacement of an
existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit that will not create an additional
primary dwelling unit and will result in a net increase of more than 2,000
square feet of habitable space, a Duplex on an approved Duplex lot
(Section 430-13.3), and Middle Housing are subject to limited requirements
of Article V as indicated within specific Subsections.
B. Any other structure that meets all of the following is exempt from Article V,
except for the Transportation Development Tax (TDT) requirement:
(1) Contains 2,000 square feet or less;
(2) Does not, in itself, generate more than 14 vehicle trips per day, as
defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation
Information Report;
(3) Contains no plumbing fixtures, or has less than 12 additional fixtures
attached to an existing, approved septic system or public sewer; and
(4) Does not pose any unique public health or safety issues.
The exceptions of Section 501-2.2 A through D are not applicable in the
North Bethany Subarea in the Bethany Community Plan. In the North
Bethany Subarea, all new construction of structures or expansion of an
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:3Supp. No. 2
existing structure, except for construction of a single (one only) detached
dwelling unit, is subject to the applicable standards of Section 501-10. For
example, a Type I or Type II park adjacent to a Primary Street would need
to build a half-street along the park's frontage on this street consistent with
the requirements of Section 501-8.
501-2.3 To any change in use, except when all of the following are met:
A. Does not require a building permit;
B. Does not, in itself, generate more than 14 additional vehicle trips per day
as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation
Information Report;
C. Has less than 12 additional fixtures attached to an existing, approved
septic system or public sewer; and
D. Does not pose any unique public health or safety issues.
501-2.4 To the following off-street parking areas:
A. New commercial parking facilities (Section 313-3.21);
B. New surface parking lots or parking garages that have not been approved
in conjunction with an allowed use; and
C. Expansions to existing commercial parking facilities (Section 313-3.21),
surface parking lots, or parking garages that:
(1) Add or relocate existing access points;
(2) Provide connections to developed adjoining properties that were not
approved through the initial development approval; or
(3) Have additional road frontage that was not part of the initi al
development approval.
501-2.5 Public Facility and Service Standards (Section 501-1 through 501-13) shall not
apply to Type I Temporary Uses (Section 430-135.1).
501-2.6 Public Facility and Service Standards (Section 501-3 through 501-13) shall
apply only as noted below, to the following uses:
A. Urban Accessory Dwelling Unit(s) (Section 430-2) - Section 501-8.5
(Access to Public Roads) shall apply.
B. The following uses are subject to requirements of Sections 501-2.8
(Transportation Development Tax, North Bethany and Bonny Slope West
Transportation System Development Charges), 501-8.1 (Critical Services),
501-8.2 A, B, H, J and K (Essential Services), 501-8.3 B (Desirable
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:4Supp. No. 2
Services), 501-8.4 (Dedication of Right-of-Way), and 501-8.5 F (Sight
Distance), except to the extent otherwise indicated within the referenced
standards:
(1) A Single Detached Dwelling Unit on a lot that is not subject to
conditions of a Standard Land Division (430-37.1 A or B);
(2) A Duplex that does not meet the definition of Middle Housing in
Section 106, on an approved Duplex lot (Section 430-13.3);
(3) Middle Housing (430-84). In addition to requirements above, Middle
Housing Triplexes, Quadplexes and Townhouses are subject to
access spacing standards of 501-8.5 in specific circumstances, as
described in 430-84.3 B (4) and 430-84.4 B (5).
(See table below).
C. Expansion or replacement of an existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit
(Section 430-37.1 A) that will not create an additional primary dwelling unit
and will result in a net increase of more than 2,000 square feet of habitable
space - Sections 501-8.1 (Critical Services), 501-8.2 B, J and K (Essential
Services), 501-8.3 B (Desirable Services), 501-8.4 (Dedic ation of
Right-of-Way) and 501-8.5 F (Sight Distance) shall apply, except to the
extent otherwise indicated within the referenced standards.
(See table below).
D. Middle Housing Land Division (Article VI) - Sections 501-2.8 (Transportation
Development Tax, North Bethany and Bonny Slope West Transportation
System Development Charges), 501-8.1 (Critical Services), 501-8.2 A, B,
C, E, G, H, J and K (Essential Services), 501-8.3 B (Desirable Services),
501-8.4 (Dedication of Right-of-Way), 501-8.5 [Sight Distance, and for
Middle Housing Triplexes, Quadplexes and Townhouses, access spacing
standards in specific circumstances, as described in 430-84.3 B(4) and
430-84.4 B(5)], and 502 (Sidewalk Standards), except to the extent
otherwise indicated within the referenced standards.
(See table below).
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:5Supp. No. 2
Basic Requirements for Uses Under 501-2.6 B through D
(see full requirements in standards)
 REQUIREMENT,
CDC §
SINGLE
DETACHED
DWELLING
UNIT, MIDDLE
HOUSING
DUPLEX,
DUPLEX ON
APPROVED
DUPLEX LOT
> 2,000 SF
SINGLE
DETACHED
DWELLING
UNIT
EXPANSION
MIDDLE
HOUSING
EXCEPT
DUPLEX
MIDDLE
HOUSING
LAND DIVISION
Right-of-Way: § 501-8.4
'
See § 501-8.1 B (2) for limits applicable to certain uses
Sidewalk:
§ 501-8.1 B. (5), 502 N/A
'
Frontage of
resulting lots or
parcels only, as
part of 501-8.1
B. (5)(a) street
improvements
Sight Distance: § 501-8.5 F.
'
Meet, or maximize where standards allow
Half Street:
§ 501-8.1 B. (9) and 501-8.2 G. N/A
'
Frontage of
resulting lots
only
Proof of emergency-standard
access to public street: § 501-8.1
A and B
N/A
'
Fire district confirmation per
Sufficient Infrastructure
requirements (See § 106)
Sewer: § 501-8.1 A.
'
'
+ CWS confirmation per Sufficient
Infrastructure requirements (§ 106) Drainage:
§ 410, 501-8.1 C.
Other Service Provider Letters:
§ 501-8.1, 8.2, 10.2, 13.3
' N/A '
Street Lighting:
§ 501-8.2 C. N/A
'
Frontage of
resulting lots
only
Annex to Urban Road
Maintenance District, Enhanced
Sheriff's Patrol District, Park
District:
§ 501-8.1 D., 8.2 K., 10.2, 13.3
'
Access (spacing): § 501-8.5 ' If new access
'
Triplexes, Quadplexes and
Townhouses only, as described in
§ 430-84.3 B. (4), 430-84.4 B. (5)
Transportation Development Tax,
North Bethany/Bonny Slope West
Transportation System
Development Charges
See § 501-2.8

501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:6Supp. No. 2
501-2.7 Public Facility and Service Standards (Section 501-3 through 501-13) shall not
apply to a new structure or addition to an existing structure that meets all of the
following criteria:
A. Does not constitute a use described in and made subject to Public Facility
and Service Standards by other subsections of 501-2, above;
B. Contains 2,000 square feet or less;
C. Does not, in itself, generate more than 14 vehicle trips per day, as defined
by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation Information
Report;
D. Contains no plumbing fixtures, or has less than 12 additional fixtures
attached to an existing, approved septic system or public sewer; and
E. Does not pose any unique public health or safety issues.
The exceptions of Section 501-2.7 A through D are not applicable in the North
Bethany Subarea of the Bethany Community Plan.
501-2.8 Notwithstanding above subsections of 501-2, all new const ruction and expansion
of existing structures shall pay the:
A. Transportation Development Tax, except as provided in the Transportation
Development Tax Ordinance; and
B. North Bethany Transportation System Development Charge (NBTSDC),
except as provided in the Resolution and Order adopting the NBTSDC; or
C. Bonny Slope West Transportation System Development Charg e
(BSWTSDC), except as provided in the Resolution and Order adopting the
BSWTSDC.
(Ord. No. 814, § 2.D.(Exh. 4, § 2), 10-25-16; Ord. No. 831A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1, § 19), 7-17-18,
eff. 8-16-18; Ord. No. 866, § 2.C.(Exh. 3, § 24), 9-1-20, eff. 10-1-20; Ord. No. 885A,
§ 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22; Ord. No. 890A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1, §§ 1., 25.), 2-7-23,
eff. 3-9-23; Ord. No. 912A, § 2.B.(Exh. 2, § 1), 4-28-26, eff. 5-28-26)
501-3 Application of the Public Facility and Service Standards for Multiple
Actions
501-3.1 When multiple development actions are proposed for a site, the Public Facility
and Service Standards shall be applied to the first action unless during that
action specific findings are presented which make it appropriate to postpone
application of the standards to a subsequent development action. Postponement
of payment of the Transportation Development Tax shall be allowed only as
provided in the Transportation Development Tax Ordinance.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:7Supp. No. 2
501-3.2 When initial application of the Public Facility and Service Standards is through
a Type II or Type III process, subsequent development actions on the property
for the same development may be reviewed for consistency with the action
taken in the initial application of the Public Facility and Service Standards
through a Type I process.
If the Review Authority determines and makes findings that circumstances have
changed or the impacts of the subsequent development exceed the Public
Facility and Service requirements by an amount greater than would be allowed
by the exceptions of Section 501-2, the application shall be reevaluated for
conformance with the Public Facility and Service Standards through the same
procedure type as the prior approval.
(Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22)
501-4 Deferral of Public Facility and Service Standards
Based on a preliminary analysis of Public Facility and Service Standards
impacts, the Review Authority may:
501-4.1 Defer final application of the Public Facilities and Service Standards, within the
impact or analysis area, until a subsequent stage in the development process if
the Review Authority determines that there is insufficient certainty as to the
ultimate use and resulting public facility and service demands to accurately
assess the facility and service impacts and appropriate conditions of approval.
501-4.2 If such a deferral is allowed, consideration of the deferred public facility and
service issues shall occur through a Type II or III process, separate from or in
conjunction with other required development hearings. Building permits for any
phase of a development shall not be issued until all public facility and service
issues associated with that phase are satisfactorily resolved in accordance with
this Article.
501-5 Exemptions from Public Facility and Service Standards of Section 501-2
501-5.1 When an applicant seeks a development permit for a proposal exempt from the
Public Facility and Service Standards as provided in Section 501-2, the applicant
shall demonstrate that the service or services are in fact not available for the
proposal.
501-5.2 In the case of sewer service, if sewer is within 300 feet of a property line of the
proposed development, the service shall be deemed available for purposes of
application of Sections 501-2 and 501-5.
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:8Supp. No. 2
501-6 Exceptions for Critical and Essential Services
501-6.1 Development proposals that cannot ensure critical and essential services
applicable to the development, other than those required by Sections 501-8.1 B
(9) or 501-8.2 G. (Half-street improvements), within the required time frames
shall be denied unless all of the following findings can be made:
A. The particular inadequate facility(ies) or service(s) is not necessary for the
particular proposal within the time period identified by the service provider;
B. The approval of the development application will not substantially interfere
with the ability to later provide the particular inadequate facility(ies) or
service(s) to anticipated uses in the vicinity of the subject property;
C. The approval of the development application without the assurance of the
particular inadequate facility(ies) and service(s) will not cause a danger to
the public or residents in the vicinity of the subject property; and
D. It is shown that the applicant has exhausted all practical methods within
the ability of the applicant to ensure the provisions of the unacceptable
facility(ies) and service(s).
501-6.2 Exceptions to the Public Facility and Service Standards as provided under
Section 501-6.1 will be reviewed through a Type III process.
501-6.3 Development proposals subject to improvements required by Sections 501-8.1
B (9) or 501-8.2 G. (Half-street improvements) that cannot ensure those
improvements within the required time frames shall be denied unless the
Review Authority determines that the findings required under Sections 501-6.1
B. and C. plus the findings required by at least one of Sections 501-6.3 A.
through C. below can be made.
A. Within 500 feet of the subject site (not including the subject site), measured
in each direction along the frontage road, but not beyond the nearest
intersecting Collector or Arterial road:
(1) No similar frontage improvements exist on the same side of the street
as the subject site; and
(2) Seventy-five percent or more of the parcels fronting on the same side
as the subject site cannot be divided based on the allowed minimum
lot size or density requirements of the applicable land use district(s).
B. The subject improvements will be constructed as part of a planned and
funded public road improvement project scheduled to begin construction
within 12 months of the proposed development's approval date.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:9
C. The County Engineer makes a written determination that there are technical
feasibility constraints that preclude construction of the required
improvements with the proposed development, including but not limited to
one or more of the following:
(1) The ultimate alignment and grade for the roadway cannot be
established;
(2) Construction of the required improvements would be inconsistent
with the ultimate alignment and grade for the roadway, due to existing
conditions in the vicinity of the proposed development site;
(3) Topographic or environmental features make construction physically
impracticable; or
(4) Construction of the subject improvements would cause substantial
negative effects on adjacent properties or on natural resources,
provided that the negative effects could be avoided with a
comprehensive public roadway improvement project on the subject
road, designed and constructed in accordance with the Washington
County Transportation System Plan and Road Design and
Construction Standards.
501-6.4 Requests for exceptions to the requirements of Sections 501-8.1 B. (4) or
501-8.2 G. (Half-street improvements) as provided under Section 501-6.3 shall
be reviewed through the same procedure type otherwise required for the
proposed development action(s), separate from or in conjunction with other
required development hearings.
501-6.5 If an exception to Sections 501-8.1 B. (4) or 501-8.2 G. (Hal f-street
improvements) is granted pursuant to Section 501-6.3, the applicant shall:
A. Be required to provide improvements necessary to mitigate the impact of
the proposed development on the road system; and
B. Assure the following, with said assurance provided prior to issuance of a
building permit:
(1) All other applicable requirements of Sections 501-8.1 and 501-8.2,
as determined by the Review Authority, shall be satisfied prior to
occupancy of the development;
(2) All identified safety improvements, both on-site and within the impact
and analysis area (pursuant to Resolution and Order No. 86-95
"Determining Traffic Safety Improvements under the Traffic Impact
Fee Ordinance - Process Documentation" as modified or updated),
shall be constructed prior to occupancy of the development; and
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:10
(3) Sidewalks must be constructed adjacent to any road directly abutting
the development site as otherwise required by this Article prior to
occupancy of the development.
501-6.6 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section 501-6, all new construction and
expansion of the existing structures shall pay the Transportation Development
Tax, except as provided in the Transportation Development Tax Ordinance
(Ordinance 691 as amended). No exception to the Transportation Development
Tax shall be granted except as provided in the Transportation Development Tax
Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22; Ord. No. 890A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1,
§ 25.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23)
501-7 Levels of Public Facilities and Services
501-7.1 Implementation strategies of the Comprehensive Plan have placed Public
Facilities and Services into three categories for development:
A. Critical Services. Public water, public sewer, fire protection, drainage and
access on Local and Neighborhood Route roads;
B. Essential Services. Schools, Arterial (including State highways) and
Collector roads, Regional Trails identified on the Transportation System
Plan Pedestrian System map, transit improvements, police protection,
street lighting and on-site pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the public
right-of-way; and
C. Desirable Services. Public transportation service, parks, traffic calming
devices, mid-block crossings, Community Trails identifie d on the
Transportation System Plan Pedestrian System Map, Special Area Trails,
Pedestrian Connectivity Areas identified on the Community Plans and
off-site pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
501-7.2 As used in Article V, the words listed below include the following meaning unless
otherwise specifically identified:
A. When the term "Collector" is used, it shall include "Special Area Collector"
facilities.
B. When the term "Neighborhood Route" is used, it shall include "Special
Area Neighborhood Route" facilities.
C. When the term "Local" street or road is used, it shall include "Special Area
Local Streets" and "Special Area Commercial Street" facilities.
501-7.3 The level of on- and off-site improvements shall be determined based upon the
impact and benefit of the proposed development on each facility or service. The
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:11
boundaries of the impact area for each facility or service shall be determined by
the service provider. The boundaries of each impact area need not be identical.
501-7.4 The service provider's information shall be treated as a rebuttable assumption
as to the ability to provide an acceptable level of service. However, the evidence
that can rebut it must be compelling evidence based upon objective data in
order to controvert the determination of the service provider.
501-7.5 The analysis area for collector and arterial roads shall be that geographic area
directly impacted and benefited by the proposed development. Data required
for determining this area is the responsibility of the applicant and shall be
provided to and approved as to adequacy by the county prior to processing of
the application by the county.
501-8 Standards for Development
501-8.1 Critical Services
A. An applicant for development shall provide documentation from the
appropriate non-county service provider that adequate water, sewer and
fire protection can be provided to the proposed development prior to
occupancy. The documentation shall be no more than 90 days old.
For Middle Housing other than a Duplex:
(1) The applicant shall submit written statements from the applicable
water, sewer and fire protection service providers, consistent
with requirements for "Sufficient Infrastructure" as defined in
Section 106, that demonstrate:
(a) Existing connections to public water and sewer systems
are capable of meeting established service levels, or that
describe improvements needed to comply; and
(b) Access via public or private streets meets emergency
vehicle access standards to a public street system, or that
describe improvements needed to comply.
(2) Improvements deemed necessary by service providers, for
"Sufficient Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106, must be
shown on the applicant's site plan and the applicant must
include a written statement within the application agreeing to
complete and obtain inspection approval for these improvements
prior to issuance of the first occupancy permit.
(3) In addition, for a Middle Housing Land Division:
(a) The applicant shall comply with requirements of (1) and (2)
above; and
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:12
(b) Standard road improvement requirements and associated
requirements for drainage may be applied where resulting
lots or parcels abut the street.
B. No development shall be approved without an adequate level of access to
the proposed development in place or assured at the time of occupancy,
with "adequate" defined for critical road services as:
(1) For housing types described under (1)(a) through (e), belo w,
compliance with (2) through (5) below, except as noted:
(a) A Single Detached Dwelling Unit on a lot that is not subject to
conditions of a Standard Land Division;
(b) Expansion or replacement of an existing Single Detached
Dwelling Unit that will not create an additional primary dwelling
unit and will result in a net increase of more than 2,000 square
feet of habitable space - except that site access requirements of
(3), below, apply only where a new driveway is proposed;
(c) A Duplex that does not meet the definition of Middle Housing on
an approved Duplex lot;
(d) Middle Housing on a single shared lot;
(e) Middle Housing Land Division - additional requirements apply
to this land use action as noted in (5) below.
(2) Right-of-way along the entire site frontage meets the following, at
minimum, unless modified through a Type II exception approval
under Section 501-8.4 B (2), or the site fronts only private street(s):
(a) For uses under 501-8.1 B (1)(a) through (d):
(i) Local street: 25 feet to centerline;
(ii) Neighborhood route: 30 feet to centerline;
(iii) Collector: 37 feet to centerline;
(iv) Arterial: 45 feet to centerline; or
If road improvements built to ultimate County standard exist, no
additional right-of-way is required.
Right-of-way dedications needed to meet minimums above,
shall be provided using a document prepared and approved by
the County Surveyor's Office, and recorded prior to issuance of
the first building permit.
(b) For a Middle Housing Land Division, Washington County
Functional Classification standards.
Right-of-way dedications needed to meet this requirement shall
be shown on the preliminary plat and recorded with the final
plat.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:13
(3) Site access is consistent with Sight Distance provisions of Section
501-8.5 F.
(4) Additionally, for Middle Housing (except Duplexes), and M iddle
Housing Land Divisions ((1)(c) and (d) above), compliance with
emergency vehicle access requirements of 501-8.1 A.
(5) The remainder of Section 501-8.1 B does not apply to housing as
described under 501-8.1 B (1)(a) through (d), but may be applied to
other housing.
Application of the remainder of 501-8.1 B, below, to a Middle Housing
Land Division (Article VI) shall be limited as follows:
(a) Street frontage improvement requirements exceeding "Sufficient
Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106 may be required only
where a resulting lot or parcel abuts the street; and
(b) Where beyond frontage of resulting lots, improvement
requirements shall not exceed those necessary to accommodate
"Sufficient Infrastructure" requirements for access meet ing
adopted emergency vehicle standards, to a public street system,
as defined in Section 106.
(6) Those Local and Neighborhood Route roads, new or existing, lying
wholly within the property's real property boundaries or future roadway
alignments designated in the Washington County Transportation
System Plan (TSP). Roadways shall be developed in accordance
with Washington County's Road Design and Construction Standards
and roadway alignments designated in the TSP may be adjusted
within the subject property as approved by the County Engineer; and
(7) For those access roads lying adjacent to and between the property
owner's proposed development and the nearest adequate Collector
or Arterial road, as defined in Essential Services, or future roadway
alignments designated in the Washington County Transportation
System Plan, likely to attract the highest traffic volume from the
proposed development (based on existing and/or forecast traffic
volumes) the road(s) must meet the following minimum standards:
(a) Have a wearing surface and structural life expectancy period of
no less than 5 years (paved) as determined by the County
Engineer;
(b) Paved surfaces for existing roadways shall be 22 feet or greater
in width. New roads shall meet the adopted County Road
Standards as determined by the County Engineer;
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:14
(c) On-site means all lands in the land use application and one-half
the right-of-way of existing roads lying adjacent to such lands;
(d) On-site entering sight distance meets standards as specified in
"A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,"
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO); and
(e) Right-of-way on or adjacent to the frontage property meets
Washington County Functional Classification standards.
(8) For a proposed development which abuts an existing Local or
Neighborhood Route stub street, the applicant must develop a site
plan which extends the stub street into or through the development
site.
(9) A half-street improvement shall be constructed along the s ite's
frontage of existing Local and Neighborhood Route roads which abut
the site and are not improved in accordance with the Washington
County Transportation System Plan and Road Design and
Construction Standards. This standard does not apply to housing
types described in 501-8.1 B (1), except in the case of a Middle
Housing Land Division. For a Middle Housing Land Division, this
requirement may be applied only where resulting lots abut the street.
C. No development shall be approved without adequate drainag e as
prescribed by the county Drainage Master Plan or the adopted Drainage
Ordinance or Resolution and Order, and adequate provisions for
stormwater, surface water and water quality management as required by
the Clean Water Services' "Design and Construction Standards for Sanitary
Sewer and Surface Water Management" or its successor.
For Middle Housing other than a Duplex:
(1) The applicant shall submit a written statement from Clean Water
Services consistent with requirements for "Sufficient Infrastructure"
as defined in Section 106, that existing storm drainage facilities are
capable of meeting established service levels for storm drainage, or
describing improvements needed to comply; and
(2) Improvements deemed necessary by Clean Water Services, for
"Sufficient Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106, must be shown
on the site plan, and the application must include a written agreement
to complete and obtain inspection approval for these improvements
prior to issuance of the first occupancy permit; and
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:15
(3) Comply with applicable grading and drainage requirements of Section
410.
(4) For a Middle Housing Land Division:
(a) The applicant shall comply with requirements of (1) through (3)
above; and
(b) Standard road improvement and sidewalk requirements, and
associated drainage requirements, may be applied only where
resulting lots or parcels abut the street.
D. No development shall be approved on property that is located outside of
the Washington County Urban Road Maintenance District. The subject
property shall be annexed into this district prior to being granted final
approval of a development application. For applications wh ere both
preliminary and final approval are not required, the property shall annex
into the district prior to being granted preliminary approval.
E. For development in a Transit Oriented District, or development outside a
Transit Oriented District but adjacent to a designated Special Area street,
a 9-foot pedestrian/utility easement shall be recorded adjacent to frontage
on a Special Area Neighborhood Route or Special Area Commercial
street. A 10-foot pedestrian/utility easement shall be recorded adjacent to
a Special Area Local street. If the required sidewalk width is greater than
the sidewalk/utility easement, additional sidewalk easements shall be
recorded to the outside edge of the required sidewalk. (See Section 431
for use-specific exclusions and limitations).
501-8.2 Essential Services
A. Service Provider Documentation
(1) An applicant shall provide documentation from the appropriate school
district, police or sheriff department, transit agency, trail provider and
highway department that adequate levels of service are available or
will be available to the proposed development within the time-frames
required by the service provider. Accessory Dwelling Units are exempt
from this requirement and development of housing as described
under 501-8.1 B(1) is subject only to requirements for documentation
from the school district and police or sheriff, and is not subject to (2)
(c) or (d) below.
(2) If the service provider documents that an adequate level of service is
not available or will not be available within the time-frame required,
the service provider shall be requested to provide informat ion
regarding the service provider's ability to provide adequate levels of
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:16
services and alternative means which could be employed to provide
adequate levels of service. Documentation of adequacy and
alternatives to provide adequate levels of services may include but
are not limited to the following:
(a) Schools:
(i) Amount of bonded indebtedness;
(ii) Use of double shifting;
(iii) Extended school periods;
(iv) Bussing to underutilized facilities;
(v) Year-round school;
(vi) Construction of new facilities;
(vii) Portable classrooms;
(viii) Impact fees;
(ix) Any combination of these or other alternatives.
(b) Police or Sheriff Services:
(i) Contracting with private agency;
(ii) Contracting with other public agency;
(iii) Impact fees;
(iv) Any combination of these or other alternatives.
(c) Provision of Transit Improvements:
(i) All applications subject to Article V shall provide
documentation from the transit agency which demonstrates
whether or not an appropriate level of transit access to the
proposed site exists. The documentation from the Transit
District shall indicate: a) whether existing transit service
exists near the site, and if it does b) whether bus stops
located near the site are adequate, and, if not, what
improvements are necessary.
(ii) Property located along a Regular Bus Service route,
Frequent Bus Service route or an Existing High Capacity
Transit station; as designated on the Transportation System
Plan. If an existing or planned transit stop is located in front
of the subject property, the Transit District may request via
the service availability letter that the county require an
easement or dedication of right-of-way at the stop in order
to make future passenger boarding facility improvements.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:17
Additionally, the Transit District may relocate a stop or
request via the service availability letter that the county
require a new stop in front of the property along with an
easement at the stop. The Transit District shall make the
determination as to whether or not additional right-of-way
or an easement is necessary.
(iii) Properties subject to this section may also be subject to
more expansive transit related requirements as set forth in
Section 380, Convenient Access to Transit Overlay District.
(d) Regional Trails
(i) The applicant shall provide documentation from the curren t
or identified long-term trail provider about needed open
space or easement reservations or dedications and/or any
necessary improvements for any identified Regional Trail
on the Transportation System Plan; and
(ii) The applicant shall include in the submitted site plan any
open space or easement reservation or dedication area
and/or off-street trail, pathway or walkway identified by the
trail provider in the documentation provided pursuant to (i)
above.
B. Adequate Level of Arterial and Collector Roads
No development shall be approved without an adequate level of Arterial
and Collector roads available to the proposed development in place or
assured at the time of occupancy. This requirement is satisfied by payment
of the Transportation Development Tax. In addition, paymen t of the
Transportation Development Tax is not an assurance for improvements
required by Sections 501-8.2 C. through J. In addition to payment of the
Transportation Development Tax an applicant shall, at a minimum, assure
the following with said assurance provided prior to issuance of a building
permit:
(1) All identified safety improvements within the impact and analysis
area (pursuant to Resolution and Order No. 86-95 "Determining
Traffic Safety Improvements under the Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance
- Process Documentation" as modified or updated), shall be
constructed prior to occupancy of the development; except that
arterial and collector road requirements for uses listed under 501-8.1
B (1) are limited as described under 501-8.1.
(2) On-site road drainage is adequate to protect the facility. On-site
means all lands in the land use application and ½ the right-of-way of
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:18
existing roads lying adjacent to such lands. Development of housing
as described under 501-8.1 B (1), as required therein, shall comply
with 501-8.1 C to meet this standard;
(3) Entering sight distance meets standards as specified in "A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO);
(4) Right-of-way on or adjacent to the frontage property meets
Washington County Functional Classification Standards including
Streetscape Overlay and Enhanced Major Street Bikeway
designations; except that development of housing as described
under 501-8.1 B (1)(a) through (d) need only meet right-of-way
dimensions specified in 501-8.1 B (2)(a);
(5) Access to Arterials and Collectors is in accordance with Section
501-8.5, except that arterial and collector road requirements for
housing as described under 501-8.1 B (1) are limited as described
under 501-8.1; and
(6) Collectors or Arterials inside the UGB that abut a site and have an
existing gravel surface must be brought up to urban standards in
accordance with Section 501-8.2 E; except that requirements for
housing as described under 501-8.1 B (1) are limited as described
under 501-8.1.
C. Street Lighting
For all new Local, Neighborhood Route, Collector and Arterial streets, and
half-street improvements an applicant shall provide street lighting consistent
with county engineering standards and procedures and the requirements
of the electrical utility company providing service to the area. The applicant
shall ensure the construction, maintenance and power costs of street light
facilities through the annexation and petition for service to an existing
county service district for lighting or other funding method approved by the
County Engineer. This standard does not apply to housing types described
in 501-8.1 B (1), except in the case of a Middle Housing Land Division. For
a Middle Housing Land Division, this requirement may be applied only
where resulting lots abut the street.
D. Applicants shall be required to dedicate or reserve approp riate right-of-way
for the planned transit corridor if it is determined in the development review
process that the county has the funds available to pay for the land to be
acquired or the applicant chooses to receive the density bonus provided in
Section 375-13.2.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:19
E. Gravel roads are unacceptable for development within the Urban Growth
Boundary and they shall be improved in accordance with the Washington
County Transportation System Plan and Road Design and Construction
Standards, including the installation of street lights consistent with County
engineering standards and procedures and the requirements of the
electrical utility company providing service to the area. The applicant shall
ensure the construction, maintenance and power costs of street light
facilities through the annexation and petition for service to an existing
county service district for lighting or other funding method approved by the
County Engineer.
F. Future alignments of Collectors or Arterials as designat ed on the
Transportation System Plan (TSP) or an adopted study, lying within or
adjacent to the development's boundary shall be constructed in accordance
with the Washington County TSP and Road Design and Construction
Standards. Roadway alignments identified in the TSP may be adjusted
within the subject property, as approved by the County Engineer.
G. A half-street improvement shall be constructed along the site's frontage of
existing Collector and Arterial roads which abut the site and are not
improved in accordance with the Washington County Transpor tation
System Plan and Road Design and Construction Standards. This standard
does not apply to housing types described in 501-8.1 B (1), except in the
case of a Middle Housing Land Division. For a Middle Housing Land
Division, this requirement may be applied only where resulting lots abut
the street.
H. For development in a Transit Oriented District, a 9-foot pedestrian/utility
easement shall be recorded adjacent to frontage on a Special Area
Collector street. If the required sidewalk width is greater than this
sidewalk/utility easement, additional sidewalk easements shall be recorded
to the outside edge of the required sidewalk. (See Section 431 for
use-specific exclusions and limitations).
I. Where off-site road improvements are otherwise required as a condition of
development approval, they shall include facilities accom modating
convenient pedestrian and bicycle travel, including bicycle ways along
Arterials and Collectors. The level of pedestrian and bicycle improvement
shall be determined by the Review Authority, based upon the impact of the
proposed development.
J. When a development site includes frontage on a roadway that is identified
as a "Pedestrian Parkway" or "Streetscape Overlay" on the Pedestrian
System Map in the Transportation System Plan, the Director shall determine
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:20
if additional right-of-way, setbacks, easements or right-of-way reservations
are required so that implementation of Pedestrian System designations
will not be precluded. For development of housing described under 501-8.1
B (1)(a) through (d), required right-of-way dedications shall not exceed
dimensions specified in 501-8.1 B (2). For Middle Housing and Middle
Housing Land Divisions, above noted easements and right-of -way
reservations shall not preclude siting of buildings at minimum setbacks of
the district, and for purposes of meeting this requirement, easements may
overlap the district-specified setback.
K. Law Enforcement Services
No development shall be approved on property that is located outside of
the Washington County Enhanced Sheriff's Patrol District. The subject
property shall be annexed into the district prior to being granted final
approval of a development application. For applications wh ere both
preliminary and final approval are not required, the property shall annex
into the district prior to being granted preliminary approval.
L. Applications may be conditioned to provide on- and off-site Regional Trails
including appropriate on-site open space or easement reservations or
dedications, when identified by the appropriate agency. Applications shall
address any regional trail, identified on the Transportation System Plan
Pedestrian System map, or the applicable community plan, that is adjacent
to or in proximity to the subject site. Specifically, the applicant shall:
(a) Provide documentation from the current or identified long-term trail
provider about needed open space or easement reservations or
dedications and/or any necessary improvements for any Regional
Trail or pathway identified on the Transportation System Pl an
Pedestrian System map or on the applicable community plan; and
(b) Show on the submitted site plans any open space or easement
reservation or dedication area for any Regional Trail, pathway or
walkway identified by the trail provider in the documentation provided
pursuant to (a) above.
501-8.3 Desirable Services
A. Pedestrian walkways, Community Trails and other off-street accessways,
traffic calming devices, and mid-block crossings, pathways and bicycle
facilities
(1) Applications may be conditioned to provide Community Trai l
connections identified on the Transportation System Plan Pedestrian
System map, on- and off- site traffic calming devices, on- and off-site
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:21
mid-block crossings, on- and off-site pedestrian walkways, off-street
trails and pathways; and on- and off-site bicycle facilities, including
appropriate open space or easement reservations or dedications,
when identified by the appropriate agency and a direct impact or
benefit to the proposed use is identified.
Mid-block crossings or traffic calming devices may be required if all
the following circumstances are met:
(a) The County Engineer makes a written determination that traffic
calming devices or mid-block crossings are necessary.
(b) Placement of traffic calming devices on or within the pavement
must be coordinated with fire protection service provider.
(c) Traffic calming devices and mid-block crossings shall be
constructed in accordance with the Road Design and
Construction Standards.
(2) Applications shall address any Community Trail, off-stre et trail,
pathway, walkway or other feature identified on the Transportation
System Plan Pedestrian System map or the applicable Community
Plan (including facilities identified in Pedestrian Connectivity Areas),
that is on, adjacent to or in proximity to the subject site. Specifically,
the applicant shall:
(a) Provide documentation from the current or identified long-term
trail provider about needed open space or easement
reservations or dedications and/or any necessary improvements
for any identified Community Trail, on- or off-site walkway, or
pathway; and
(b) Include in the submitted site plan any open space or easement
reservation or dedication area and/or Community Trail, off-street
trail, pathway or walkway identified by the trail provider in the
documentation provided pursuant to (a) above.
B. Park and recreation facilities
(1) Properties not currently located within the boundary of a Park District
shall annex to the District when the following conditions are met:
(a) The property lies within an area identified for park service by the
Park District in an urban service agreement; or,
(b) If no urban service agreement applies to the property, the
property lies between the Hillsboro, Tigard and Portland Urban
Service Boundaries or lies within an area for which the District is
designated a party in a cooperative agreement; and
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:22
(c) The Park District has adopted a Park Master Plan for the area
the property is located in.
(2) Provision of park and recreation services to properties added to the
UGB after 1998:
No development shall be approved on property added to the UGB
after 1998 when a Park District is identified as the long-term park and
recreation service provider and the subject property is located outside
of the Park District's boundary unless the property is annexed to the
District.
(3) If the conditions in Subsection (1) and (2) exist, the development
application shall not be approved unless the applicant has filed with
the county a legally sufficient petition for annexation to the Park
District containing the consent of all property owners and a majority
of the electors for the property that is the subject of the application.
Further, the application shall be conditioned that documentation of
final annexation approval be provided prior to issuance of final
approval for Standard Land Divisions and Middle Housing Land
Divisions, and prior to issuance of final approval and building permits
for other development. The requirements of Subsections (1) and (2)
may be waived only if the applicant provides documentation from the
Park District that the District is unable or unwilling to accept annexation
of the property into the District.
501-8.4 Dedication of Right-of-Way
Dedication of right-of-way shall be required as follows:
A. Pursuant to the classification of the facility as designated by the Washington
County Transportation System Plan and based upon the county Road
Standards; or
B. For a Single Detached Dwelling Unit on a lot that is not subject to
conditions of a Standard Land Division, a Duplex, expansion or replacement
of a Single Detached Dwelling Unit that will result in a net habitable space
increase of more than 2,000 square feet, and Middle Housing when all
units are on a shared lot:
(1) Required right-of-way dedication shall not exceed minimu m
right-of-way required for such uses by district standards (also reflected
in 501-8.1 B (2));
(2) Through a Type II procedure, the Review Authority may exempt a
proposed development from full compliance with district right-of-way
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:23
minimums, subject to evidence that an existing structure (intended to
remain), environmental features, or other physical constraints make
full dedication impracticable.
When all exemption criteria above are met, reduction of the
right-of-way requirement shall be to the minimum extent necessary
to accommodate the constraint, and the review authority may require
a fee in lieu as long as such fee is consistent with a program adopted
by the Board of County Commissioners.
C. Setback requirements of this Code shall not apply to existing structures to
the extent that setbacks are reduced by a public dedication.
501-8.5 Access to Public Roads
All developments shall have legal access to a public road. Except for interim
access as provided in Section 501-8.5 E. (Interim Access), access onto any
public road in the unincorporated or incorporated urban area shall be permitted
only upon issuance of an access permit upon demonstration of compliance with
the provisions of the county road standards and the standards of Section 501.
For Middle Housing, access spacing requirements Section 501 apply only to
Triplexes, Quadplexes and Townhouses, and only in specific circumstances
described in 430-84.3 B (4) and 430-84.4 B (5).
A. Roadway Access
See following access diagram where R/W = Right-of-Way; and P.I. =
Point-of-Intersection where P.I. shall be located based upon a 90-degree
angle of intersection between ultimate right-of-way lines.
(1) Minimum right-of-way radius at intersections shall conform to the
county Road Standards.
(2) All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall be
governed by sight distance requirements according to county Road
Standards.
(3) All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall be
measured to the nearest easement line of the access or edge of
travel lane of the access on both sides of the road.
(4) All minimum distances between accesses shall be measured from
existing or approved accesses on both sides of the road.
(5) Minimum spacing between driveways shall be measured from Point
"C" to Point "C" as shown below:
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:24
B. Roadway Access:
No use will be permitted to have direct access to a street or road except as
specified below, or as provided in Section 501-8.5 E. (Interim Access),
exceptions to access criteria are provided for in subsection C below.
Access spacing shall be measured from existing or approved accesses on
either side of a street or road.
(1) Local Streets
Minimum right-of-way radius is 15 feet. Access will not be permitted
within 10 feet of Point "B," if no radius exists, access will not be
permitted within 25 feet of Point "A." Access points near an intersection
with a Collector or Arterial shall be located beyond the influence of
standing queues of the intersection in accordance with AASHTO
standards. This requirement may result in an access spacing greater
than 10 feet. Interim access may be permitted, pursuant to the
standards of Section 501-8.5 E. (Interim Access).
(2) Neighborhood Routes
All residential, commercial, institutional and industrial uses with 70
feet or more of frontage will be permitted direct access to a
Neighborhood Route. Uses with less than 70 feet of frontage shall not
be permitted a permanent single or separate direct access to a
Neighborhood Route. Interim access which does not preclude a
future common entrance with adjacent property may be permitted
pursuant to the standards of Section 501-8.5 E. (Interim Access).
Where a common access is available it shall be used, provided that
such use will not result in serious operational or safety problems.
No use will be permitted direct access to a Neighborhood Route
within 50 feet of Point "A"; or future "P.I." as designated in or
consistent with the Transportation System Plan (TSP). New
Neighborhood Route alignments identified in the TSP can be adjusted
within the subject property, as approved by the County Engineer. In
the case of a Neighborhood Route which is entirely within a
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:25
development, double aisle parking areas will be permitted direct
access to that Neighborhood Route. Minimum spacing between
driveways (Point "C" to Point "C") shall be 50 feet with the exception
of single detached residential lots in a recorded Standard Subdivision.
Such lots shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement
between driveways (Point "C" to Point "C"). In all instances, access
points near an intersection with a Collector or Arterial shall be located
beyond the influence of standing queues of the intersection in
accordance with AASHTO standards. This requirement may result in
an access spacing greater than 50 feet.
(3) Collectors
All commercial, industrial and institutional uses with 150 feet or more
of frontage will be permitted direct access to a Collector. Uses with
less than 150 feet of frontage shall not be permitted direct access to
Collectors. Interim access which does not preclude future common
entrance with adjacent property may be permitted pursuant to the
standards of Section 501-8.5 E. (Interim Access). Where a common
access is available it shall be used, provided that such use will not
result in serious operational or safety problems. No use will be
permitted direct access to a Collector within 100 feet of any present
Point "A"; or future "P.I." as designated in the Transportation System
Plan (TSP). New Collector Street alignments identified in the TSP
may be adjusted within the subject property, as approved by the
County Engineer.
In the case of a Collector which is entirely within a single development
and which provides circulation only within that development, double
aisle parking areas will be permitted access to that Collector. Minimum
spacing between driveways (Point "C" to Point "C") shall be 100 feet.
In all instances, access points near an intersection with a Collector or
Arterial shall be located beyond the influence of standing queues of
the intersection in accordance with AASHTO standards. Additionally,
access shall be located to provide adequate left turn refuge as
required by Resolution and Order No. 86-95 as modified or updated.
This requirement may result in an access spacing greater than 100
feet.
(4) Arterials
Direct access to arterial roads shall be from collector or other arterial
streets. Exceptions for local streets and private accesses may be
allowed through a Type II process when collector access is found to
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:26
be unavailable and impracticable by the Director. New Arterial Street
alignments identified in the TSP may be adjusted within the subject
property, as approved by the County Engineer. Access to arterials
shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Arterials
Direct access to an arterial will be permitted provided that Point
'A' of such access is more than 600 feet from any intersection
Point 'A' or other access to that Minor Arterial (Point 'C').
(b) Principal Arterials
Principal Arterials shall be designed and developed as limited
access facilities. Access to a Principal Arterial is subject to
approval by ODOT through the State's Access Management
Policy and its implementing measures. Access to Tualatin Valley
Highway, between SW 170th and SW 209th Avenues, is subject
to the provisions of the TV Highway Access Management Plan
contained in the Aloha-Reedville-Cooper Mountain Community
Plan.
(c) On sites where direct access may be provided to more than one
Arterial or Principal Arterial only one such access shall be
granted.
C. Exception to Access Criteria
(1) Alternate points of access may be allowed if an access management
plan which maintains the classified function and integrity of the
applicable facility is reviewed and approved by the Review Authority
after considering the applicant's compliance with this Article.
(2) An application for an Access Management Plan shall explain the
need for the modification and demonstrate that the modification
maintains the classified function and integrity of the facility. References
to standards or publications used to prepare the Access Management
Application shall be included with the application.
(3) An access management plan shall address the safety and operational
problems which would be encountered should a modification to the
access spacing standards be granted. An access management plan
shall be prepared and certified by a traffic or civil engineer registered
in the State of Oregon. An access management plan shall at minimum
contain the following:
(a) The minimum study area shall include the length of the site's
frontage plus the distance of the applicable access spacing
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:27
standard, as set forth in Section 501-8.5 B., measured from the
property lines or access point(s), whichever is greater. For
example, a property with 500 feet of frontage on a minor arterial
(required 600-foot access spacing standard) shall have a
minimum study area which is 1,700 feet in length.
(b) The access management plan shall address the potential safety
and operational problems associated with the proposed access
point. The access management plan shall review both existing
and future access for all properties within the study area as
defined above.
(c) The access management plan shall include a comparison of all
alternatives examined. At a minimum, the access management
plan shall evaluate the proposed modification to the access
spacing standard and the impacts of a plan utilizing the county
standard for access spacing. Specifically, the access
management plan shall identify any impacts on the operations
and/or safety of the various alternatives.
(d) The access management plan shall include a list of
improvements and recommendations necessary to implement
the proposed access modification, specifically addressing all
safety and operational concerns identified.
(4) Notice for a proposed access management plan shall include all
property owners within the study area defined in 501-8.5 C. (3) (a).
D. Access in Transit Oriented Districts and the North Bethany Subarea Plan
Access points shown in the Transportation System Plan, on a Community
Plan within a Transit Oriented District, or in the North Bethany Subarea
Plan are not subject to the access spacing standards and do not need an
access spacing variance or an access management plan. However, as
part of the development review process, the exact location of such access
points shall be determined and safety impacts associated with such
access points shall be identified and mitigated. Additional access points
are subject to the access spacing standards.
E. Interim Access
No development shall be denied a Development Permit for the sole reason
that the parcel for which it is sought cannot physically accommodate the
access spacing requirements of this Code. In such an event, the use may
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:28
be issued an interim access permit which shall expire when access as
required under Article V becomes available. An interim access permit may
be granted based upon the following:
(1) The site is situated such that adequate access cannot otherwise be
provided in accord with the access spacing requirements of this
Code.
(2) The interim access shall meet minimum county traffic safety and
operational requirements, including sight distance.
(3) Alternate access shall not be deemed adequate and connections to
alternate access shall not be required if the resulting route of access
would require a trip in excess of one block or 500 feet out of direction
(whichever is less).
(4) New interim access locations on Arterials and Collectors shall be
posted with a sign. The sign shall note that the access is interim and
will be removed once ultimate access is available. The sign and its
location shall be approved by the County Engineer.
(5) The property owner signs a waiver of the right to remonstrate against
the formation of a Local Improvement District or similar financing
mechanism for the primary purpose of constructing a public road or
right-of-way providing access to the arterial or collector road; such
access shall meet the minimum applicable county standard.
(6) The property owner records an agreement to participate in any
project that would consolidate access points where such project
would not result in new or more severe traffic operation or safety
problems.
(7) The property owner records an agreement to abandon use of the
existing private access way when an adequate alternative access
becomes available.
(8) The property owner records an agreement stating that the interim
access shall ultimately be removed.
F. Sight Distance
The following specifies the minimum requirements for sight distance for
roads intersecting each other and for driveways intersecting public roads.
It is the intent of this section to regulate the creation of new access points
to maximize the safety of access to public roads.
(1) Inside a UGB, existing access points that do not meet the sight
distance standards and are on property included with a development
action which will not add any additional vehicle trips to that access or
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:29Supp. No. 2
will only add trips from approved Urban Accessory Dwelling Units
(Section 430-2), are exempt from this Section (501-8.5 F.), except as
required by Section 501-2.1 A.
Improvements at these existing access points may be required to
maximize sight distance to the extent practicable by the county
Operations Division through an Access Permit or Right-of-way Permit.
(2) The minimum intersectional sight distance shall be based on the
vehicular speeds of the road. The vehicular speeds for the purpose of
determining intersectional sight distance shall be the greater of the
following unless the 85 percentile speed is determined to be less by
the Review Authority pursuant to the standards of Section 501-8.5 F.
(2)(c).
(a) Design Speed - A speed selected by a registered engineer
(Oregon) for purposes of design and correlation of those features
of a road, such as curvature, superelevation, and sight distance,
upon which the safe operation of vehicles is dependent.
(b) Posted Speed - That speed which has been established by the
Oregon State Speed Control Board and is posted by the county.
(c) Eighty-five Percentile Speed - That speed as certified by a
registered engineer (Oregon) below which 85% of all traffic
units travel, and above which 15% travel. The 85 percentile
speed shall be measured at the point where the sight restriction
occurs.
(3) The intersectional sight distance shall:
(a) Be based on an eye height of 3.5 feet and an object height of
4.25 feet above the road; and
(b) Be assumed to be 15 feet from the near edge of pavement or
the extended curb line or the near edge of the graveled surface
of a gravel road to the eye of the driver of a stopped vehicle.
(4) Minimum intersectional sight distance shall be equal to ten times the
vehicular speed of the road as determined by the standards of
Section 501-8.5 F. (1) and (2) such as in the following table.
 INTERSECTIONAL SIGHT DISTANCE
MPH DISTANCE ALONG
CROSSROAD (FT)
25 250
30 300
35 350
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:30Supp. No. 2
INTERSECTIONAL SIGHT DISTANCE
MPH DISTANCE ALONG
CROSSROAD (FT)
40 400
45 450
50 500
55 550
(5) Intersectional sight distance values shall conform with section (3)
and (4) above. For significant road improvement projects, the above
intersectional standards shall be met in addition to the AASHTO
remaining sight distance standards.
(6) For land development actions, the following specifies the procedure
for determining whether or not minimum sight distance requirements
are met:
(a) Current Planning personnel will review the Traffic Impact
Statement.
(b) County personnel will perform the initial sight distance
measurements.
(c) If the measurements made under (b) above do not meet the
minimum requirements shown in the table, the applicant may
retain a State of Oregon registered professional engineer to
perform the field measurements. If the applicant's engineer
does perform the measurements and submits the information to
the county for acceptance, the information must bear the stamp
and signature of the engineer and must meet the minimum sight
distance requirements.
(7) In those instances where there are no access locations available to
the site that meet or can meet the sight distance requirements, a
written request for modification may be submitted to the Director. The
request for modification shall be specifically stated in the notice for
the accompanying development permit and shall be considered as
part of said development permit. The request for modification of the
sight distance requirements shall be subject to the following:
(a) Submitted and certified by a registered engineer (Oregon);
(b) Documented and reference nationally accepted specifications
or standards;
(c) Certified that the modification will not compromise safety or the
intent of the county's transportation standards, which include
but are not limited to the following: Washington County
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:31Supp. No. 2
Transportation System Plan; Washington County Road Design
and Construction Standards; Resolution and Order No. 86-95
as modified or updated, (Determining Traffic Safety
Improvements Under the Traffic Impact Ordinance - Process
Documentation); Community Plans; Comprehensive Framework
Plan for the Urban Area; and the Community Development
Code;
(d) The cost of any modifications agreed to must be borne by the
applicant; and
(e) There shall be no location available to provide access to the
proposed development site which currently meets the sight
distance requirements, or which can be altered to meet the sight
distance requirements. Alterations needed to provide adequate
sight distance include but are not limited to grading and the
removal of vegetation. For the purpose of this subsection
alternative access location means:
1. Any location on the proposed development site which
meets or can meet the sight distance requirements; or
2. Any location off the proposed development site which:
(i) Can provide access to the site by an existing access
easement or through an access easement which will
be provided to the site as part of the development
application; and
(ii) Meets or can meet the sight distance requirements.
G. Motor Vehicle Access Restriction
(1) In order to implement the access spacing and safety requirements of
this article, a motor vehicle access restriction shall be recorded along
a development site's frontage on a Collector or Arterial road, except
at approved motor vehicle access locations. The Review Authority
may require a motor vehicle access restriction to be recorded along
a site's frontage on a Local or Neighborhood Route street that
intersects with a Collector or Arterial road in order to addr ess
operational and safety concerns at the intersection(s).
(2) The motor vehicle access restriction shall be recorded as a restrictive
covenant or, if a plat is filed, as a Partition or Subdivision plat
restriction.
H. Road Standards
(1) All roads proposed to be of public ownership shall conform to the
county Road Standards.
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:32Supp. No. 2
(2) All proposed curve radii shall be designed to county Road Standards
for truck-turning requirements.
(3) All roads not proposed to be of public ownership shall conform to
Section 409 (Private Streets).
501-8.6 Methods to Assure Facilities and Services
A legal and enforceable document, contract or process which assures the
county that a public improvement will be accomplished. Assurances may
include but are not limited to the following:
A. For Arterial and Collector roadways, payment of the Transp ortation
Development Tax, except:
(1) For improvements required by Sections 501-8.2 C. through J.; and
(2) For safety improvements required by Resolution and Order 86-95 as
modified or updated.
B. All Critical, Essential [including 501-8.2 B. (2) through (6)], and Desirable
Facilities and Services
(1) Cash in escrow, letter of credit, or cash deposit with the county, or
other form of financial assurance acceptable to the county.
(2) Establishment of a Local Improvement District (LID) through the
post-remonstrance period. Failure of the county to accept the LID
shall constitute a waiver of the assurance requirement.
(3) Evidence of formal action by public or private agencies or companies,
including Washington County, appropriating monies for the requisite
public improvement.
(4) Annexation of the subject property into an area where a public
agency has jurisdiction and has pledged to assume the responsibility
for the required improvement.
(5) Any other legally binding arrangement that assures the improvements
will be made within the required timeframe, including:
(a) Phasing of the development;
(b) Construction of interim improvements;
(c) Construction of improvements on a phased basis; or
(d) Modification of engineering standards (i.e., reduced right-of-way
widths, sidewalks on only one side of a street, etc.), only when
approved through a Type III process.
(6) State road capacity and intersection deficiencies will be determined
to be assured if they are included in the Metro adopted Transportation
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:33Supp. No. 2
Improvement Program (TIP), which includes the State of Oregon's
Six-Year Highway Improvement Plan (HIP), unless otherwise specified
by the State during the processing of the application.
501-8.7 Notwithstanding any other provision, the Board may, by Resolution and Order,
adopt an updated version of the generally accepted transportation manuals
cited herein. Upon such adoption, the updated version adopted shall control.
501-8.8 Definitions
A. Half-Street Improvement
Improvement of one-half of an existing substandard road directly abutting
a proposed development site in accordance with the Washington County
Community Development Code, Transportation System Plan, Road Design
and Construction Standards, and other applicable county standards.
One-half of the road shall mean the area between the right-of-way centerline
and the ultimate right-of-way line directly abutting the development site,
along the entire length of the development site's frontage on the abutting
road(s), except as provided herein. Required improvements may include
any or all of the following elements as determined by the Review Authority
and the county Engineering Division through the development review
process:
(1) Dedication of right-of-way and/or easements;
(2) Grading and subgrade preparation;
(3) Construction or reconstruction of roadway paving, which may include:
(a) Turn lanes and/or bike lanes where required by the applicable
standards, and/or
(b) Up to 11 feet of additional roadway paving width beyond the
centerline of the right-of-way, if determined necessary by the
County Engineer;
(4) Construction or reconstruction of concrete curb and gutter;
(5) Pavement markings where required;
(6) Construction or reconstruction of concrete sidewalk pavi ng as
otherwise required in this Article;
(7) Construction, reconstruction, or extension of underground storm
drainage and inlets;
(8) Construction, reconstruction, or extension of fire, water, or sanitary
sewer facilities;
(9) Relocation of existing utilities where required;
(10) Illumination at access points and along roadways where required;
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:34Supp. No. 2
(11) Street trees, where required; and
(12) Construction or reconstruction of roadway crossing locations for
pedestrians or bicyclists at appropriate intersections, accessways,
trails or other locations.
B. Impact or Analysis Area. That geographic area determined by a service
provider within which the development will impact upon or benefit from the
service. A preliminary area will be defined by the service provider if
deemed necessary and a final area will be defined based upon information
provided by the applicant.
C. Impact and Benefit (with respect to roads in the impact area). A
development shall be determined to impact a roadway or intersection and
benefit from improvements if the road or intersection meets any of the
following criteria:
(1) The estimated traffic to be generated by the development exceeds
10% of the existing average daily traffic (ADT) (See existing traffic
below).
(2) "In Process" traffic volumes result in the facilities operating below
Level of Service "E" for more than 20 minutes of one peak hour and
the proposed development's traffic will be 5% or greater of total "In
Process" traffic.
(3) Pavement structure, pavement surface, vertical or horizo ntal
alignments or drainage do not meet county standards.
D. On-Site Improvements. "On-site" shall mean all lands in the development
application and one-half the right-of-way (to centerline) of roads lying
adjacent to such lands.
E. Off-Site Improvements. "Off-site" facilities or improvements shall mean
any existing or new facility improvement which is within the analysis area
but does not lie adjacent to the applicant's or owner's land.
F. Existing Traffic Volumes. Traffic volumes observed within 12 months of
the traffic analysis for the application and adjusted for daily and seasonal
traffic variations using factors supplied by the county.
G. Routine Maintenance Procedure. Any road maintenance activity except
pavement seals or overlays or the installation of new drainage facilities.
H. Total Traffic. The sum of projected and site generated traffic.
I. "In Process" Traffic. "In Process" traffic on any road segment is defined
as including the following:
(1) Proposed development's (site's) traffic; and
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:35Supp. No. 2
(2) Traffic from other developments which have been approved by the
county but not yet occupied.
J. Level of Service. The Interim Washington County Motor Vehicle Level of
Service standards identified in the Transportation System Plan.
K. Projected Traffic. Forecast traffic for year of opening, includes all existing
and in-process traffic.
(Ord. No. 809, § 2.E.(Exh. 5, § 4), 8-16-2016, eff. 9-15-2016; Ord. No. 814, § 2.D.(Exh. 4,
§ 2), 10-25-16; Ord. No. 834, § 2.B.(Exh. 2, § 2), 8-21-18, 11-23-18; Ord. No. 866,
§ 2.C.(Exh. 3, § 24), 9-1-20, eff. 10-1-20; Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff.
7-28-22; Ord. No. 890A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1, §§ 1., 25.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23; Ord. No. 912A,
§ 2.B.(Exh. 2, § 1), 4-28-26, eff. 5-28-26)
501-9 Limited Application of the Public Facility and Service Standards Outside
the UGB
501-9.1 For the purpose of determining the impact and adequacy of public facilities and
service outside the UGB only this Section of Article V applies.
501-9.2 For all Type II and Type III applications, with the exceptions noted below, impact
on the following public facilities shall be considered: school, fire, police protection
and public roads.
501-9.3 For the purpose of determining impact and adequacy of public roads, Section
501-8.5 F. (Sight Distance), 501-8.5 H. (Road Standards), a nd 501-8.4
(Dedication of Right-of-way) of this article shall apply except as provided in
Sections 501-9.4 and 501-9.5. However, in all instances, traffic safety issues
shall be addressed. Consideration of traffic safety shall include but not be
limited to the following:
A. Applicants for developments that will generate 500 or more average daily
trips (ADT), based on the current edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, shall submit a traffic analysis
which evaluates and makes recommendations for traffic safety. The traffic
analysis shall be prepared by a certified Traffic or Civil Engineer registered
in the State of Oregon. Submitted traffic analyses will be reviewed by the
County Engineer for adequacy and completeness. Where development
will access a state highway, the requirement to provide a traffic report shall
be determined by the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT).
B. Based on evaluation of the traffic analysis by the County Engineer,
improvements such as signalization, acceleration lanes, deceleration
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:36Supp. No. 2
lanes, turning lanes, and channelization may be required by the County
Engineer when found to be necessary for traffic safety under accepted
traffic engineering standards and practices.
C. Sections 501-8.5 A., 501-8.5 B.(4), 501-8.5 C. and 501-8.5 E. may apply to
development that will generate at least 200 ADT and that will access
arterial roadways upon the County Engineer's determination that the
application of these standards is in the best interest of preserving the
safety of arterial roadways.
501-9.4 Applications for Type II replacement dwellings, property line adjustments,
nonbuildable parcels, temporary housing permits, home occupations and Type
II and Type III applications for one dwelling on an existing vacant parcel, are not
subject to the requirements of Section 501-8.4 (Dedication of Right-of-way).
501-9.5 The standards of Section 501-8.5 F. (Sight Distance Standards) shall apply to all
property line adjustment applications except as specifically provided in this
subsection. Property line adjustments for parcels or lots which do not meet the
sight distance standards of Section 501-8.5 F, (including existing accesses),
shall be approved if the parcel or lot's sight distance is not decreased as a result
of the property line adjustment.
501-9.6 Accesses for the following development actions are exempt from the Sight
Distance standards (Section 501-8.5 F.), but are subject to improvements to
maximize sight distance to the extent practicable by the county Operations
Division through an Access Permit or Right-of-way Permit:
A. Replacement dwellings;
B. Nonbuildable parcels;
C. Type II and Type III applications for one dwelling on an existing vacant
parcel;
D. Home Occupation applications under Section 430-63.1 in the EFU, AF-20
and EFC Districts;
E. Temporary Health Hardships; or
F. Applications which will not add additional vehicle trips to an existing
access which does not meet the sight distance standards, except as
required by Section 501-9.5.
501-9.7 Where a Standard Land Division creates less than four lots or parcels, or there
is a request for a Special Use for a dwelling, the applicant shall not be required
to obtain service letters except from the applicable school district (Section
501-9.10).
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:37
501-9.8 For those Local and Neighborhood Route roads which are not improved in
accordance with Washington County's Road Design and Construction Standards
or maintained by the county, and which abut the property owner's proposed
development or which do not abut the development but provide direct access to
the development, the property owner shall sign a waiver not to remonstrate
against the formation of a local improvement district or other mechanism to
improve and maintain these roads to county standards. Applications for Type II
property line adjustments, nonbuildable parcels, temporary housing permits,
and Type II and III applications for one dwelling on an existing vacant parcel, are
not subject to this requirement.
501-9.9 For those Arterial and Collector roads which are not improved in accordance
with Washington County's Road Design and Construction Standards and which
abut the development site or those roads which do not abut the development
site but provide access to the site, the property owner shall sign a waiver not to
remonstrate against the formation of a local improvement district or other
mechanism to improve the base facility of this road (s) to county standards.
Applications for Type II property line adjustments, nonbui ldable parcels,
temporary housing permits, and Type II and III applications for one dwelling on
an existing vacant parcel, are not subject to this requirement.
501-9.10 For Partitions, Subdivisions, and any other development that results in the
addition of dwellings (as defined in Section 106-70), the applicant shall provide
documentation from the appropriate school district that adequate levels of
service are available or will be available to the proposed development within the
time frame required by the school district.
(Ord. No. 822A, § 2.C.(Exh. 3, § 10), 10-17-17, eff. 11-24-17; Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1,
§ 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22; Ord. No. 889A, § 2.C.(Exh. 3, § 18.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23; Ord.
No. 890A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1, § 1.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23)
501-10 Standards for Development Within the North Bethany Subarea Plan Area
501-10.1 Development within the North Bethany Subarea Plan shall be subject to the
following provisions of Article V. In the event of a conflict with any other provision
of Article V, Section 501-10 shall control.
A. Section 501-2, Application of the Public Facility and Service Standards
inside a UGB;
B. Section 501-5, Exemptions from Public Facility and Service Standards;
C. Subsections 501-6.3, 501-6.4, 501-6.5 and 501-6.6;
D. Section 501-7, Levels of Public Facilities and Services;
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:38
E. Section 501-8, Standards for Development, except for the f ollowing
subsections;
(1) 501-8.1 B. (8) (b);
(2) 501-8.3; and
(3) 501-8.5 B. (2) relating to the 70-foot frontage access spac ing
requirements. Roadway access to a Neighborhood Route from
adjacent lots or parcels with less than 70-feet of frontage may be
permitted when the following standards are met:
(a) The Neighborhood Route, where fronting the lot or parcel, is
defined as a Primary Street in the North Bethany Subarea Plan;
and
(b) A traffic or civil engineer registered in the State of Oregon
certifies the following:
(i) The facility will carry fewer than 3,500 ADT over the
planning horizon identified in the adopted Transportation
Plan; and
(ii) The access meets minimum county traffic safety and
operational requirements, including sight distance; and
(c) No use will be permitted direct access to a Neighborhood Route
within 50 feet of Point "A"; or future "P.I." (designated in the
Transportation Plan) as described in Section 501-8.5 A. Access
points near an intersection with a Collector or Arterial shall be
located beyond the influence of standing queues of the
intersection in accordance with AASHTO standards. This
requirement may result in access spacing greater than 50 feet.
F. Section 501-10, Standards for Development Within the North Bethany
Subarea Plan Area; and
G. Section 502, Sidewalk Standards.
H. Requirements for housing as described under 501-8.1 B (1) are limited as
described under 501-2 through 501-8, except that 501-10.1 E (3) and
501-10.2 A through D shall apply.
I. Public improvements for Middle Housing Land Divisions (Article VI) shall
be limited as follows:
(1) Street frontage improvement requirements exceeding "Suf ficient
Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106 may be required only where
a resulting lot or parcel abuts the street; and
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:39
(2) Where beyond frontage of resulting lots, improvement requirements
shall not exceed those necessary to accommodate "Sufficien t
Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106.
501-10.2 In addition to the provisions identified in Section 501-10.1, except for exempt
development, an application for development approval within the North Bethany
Subarea Plan shall be denied unless the applicant demonstrates that:
A. The property(ies) has been annexed to the following jurisdictions: Clean
Water Services, Metro, Tualatin Hills Park & Recreation District, Tualatin
Valley Fire and Rescue, Tualatin Valley Water District, Enhanced Sheriff's
Patrol District, and Urban Road Maintenance District.
B. Master plans for the following service districts, including a financing plan
that substantially implements the master plan, have been adopted by the
applicable service district.
(1) Tualatin Hills Park & Recreation District (THPRD): parks and trails;
(2) Tualatin Valley Water District (TVWD): water master plan; and
(3) Clean Water Services (CWS): sewer master plan and North Bethany
Drainage Master Plan.
C. The appropriate non-county service provider has assured t hat the following
services shall be provided to the subject property(ies) in the time frames
specified below. The assurance shall be no more than 90 days old:
(1) Water, sewer, fire protection, and drainage (stormwater
quality/quantity management) meeting the service provide r's
standards, including but not limited to the CWS' North Bethany
Drainage Master Plan, will be provided. This shall include acquisition
of any portion of the parcel that is needed for regional stormwater
facilities.
(2) Acquisition by THPRD of any portion of the subject property(ies)
shown on the "Park, Trails and Pedestrian Connections" map of the
North Bethany Subarea Plan as the site of a "fixed" park.
(3) For property(ies) shown on the "Park, Trails and Pedestria n
Connections" map of the North Bethany Subarea Plan as the
approximate location of a neighborhood park, trail or off-s treet
pedestrian route, the service provider has:
(a) Delineated the specific location of the neighborhood park, trail
or off-street pedestrian route; and
(b) Acquired or otherwise secured that portion of the subject
property(ies) so delineated.
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:40
(4) The location of a neighborhood park, trail or off-street pedestrian
route delineated in Subsection (3) above that is not on the subject
property(ies) shall be noted on the land use maps of the Department
of Land Use & Transportation. The land use maps include but are not
limited to the North Bethany Subarea maps in the Bethany Community
Plan.
D. No development application subject to this Article shall be approved on
property that has a neighborhood park, trail or off-street pedestrian route
as provided in Section 501-10.2 C.(3) unless acquisition of the park, trail or
pedestrian route has been assured as provided in Section 501-10.2 G.
The location or configuration of the facility may be modified through a
development application when the following requirements are met:
(1) The proposed location is consistent with the provisions of the North
Bethany Subarea Plan, including the "Park, Trails and Pedestrian
Connections" map;
(2) In the case of a park, the size is not smaller than the park size
specified in the applicable General Design Element and Neighborhood
Design Element;
(3) The proposed new location and size and configuration of the site are
acceptable to the service provider after considering the following
factors:
(a) The proposed site will maintain or increase the facility's level of
functionality (e.g., maintains sufficient area for a playground
and a ball field);
(b) The amount of available on-street parking; and
(c) The cost to acquire the proposed site and construct and maintain
the facility.
E. To provide an interim bicycle network, paved surfaces of existing access
roads lying adjacent to and between the applicant's proposed development
and the nearest a) existing Arterial or Collector, or b) existing Neighborhood
Route that is built to county standard and connects to a Collector or
Arterial, shall be a minimum of 28 feet. Through a Type III process, the
Review Authority may approve a modification to, or waiver of, this bicycle
improvement requirement based on a determination that this requirement
is impracticable for one of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant could not obtain necessary easements or additional
right-of-way at a reasonable cost where sufficient right-of-way to
accommodate the interim bicycle improvements is unavailable; or
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:41
(2) Topographical, natural resource or other physical circumstances
make it impracticable to construct the interim bicycle improvements.
(3) For the purposes of Subsection E., Portland Community College
shall not be required to use its powers of eminent domain to acquire
property or easements to provide for the interim bicycle network.
F. To provide an interim pedestrian network in areas where ultimate facilities
have not been constructed, the following shall be required. In addition to
the sidewalk requirements of Section 502 and accessway requirements of
Section 408, a direct, safe and continuous pedestrian connection shall be
required to be provided to the following pedestrian-oriented uses that are
existing or have received final land use approval and required public
improvements have been assured: schools, parks, recreation centers,
commercial uses, and the nearest transit stops that do not abut the
development site's frontage, on both sides of a street with transit service.
Interim pedestrian connections shall be provided in the quantities outlined
below and shall be constructed in accordance with County Engineer
approval:
(1) For development applications that generate less than 500 Average
Daily Trips (ADT), one connection shall be required to a
pedestrian-oriented use within one-quarter mile of the development
site if the existing connection is deficient. If two or more
pedestrian-oriented uses (as defined above) are within one-quarter
mile, the connection shall be to the use that is likely to generate the
most pedestrian travel. The length of the interim connection is not
required to exceed 1,450 feet.
In some cases, the subject development may be required to construct
off-site pedestrian improvements and acquire easements as
appropriate to construct such improvements. Easements may be
temporary if the underdeveloped land that has the easement on it will
likely redevelop and include a more permanent pedestrian connection
that serves the same purpose.
(2) For development applications that generate 500 Average Daily Trips
(ADT) or more, connections shall be required to no more than two
pedestrian-oriented uses within one-quarter mile of the development
site if the existing connections are deficient. If two or mor e
pedestrian-oriented uses (as defined above) are within one-quarter
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:42
mile, the connections shall be to the two uses that are likely to
generate the most pedestrian travel. The sum of the length of the
interim connections are not required to exceed 2,900 feet.
In some cases, the subject development may be required to construct
off-site pedestrian improvements and acquire easements as
appropriate to construct such improvements. Easements may be
temporary if the underdeveloped land that has the easement on it will
likely redevelop and include a more permanent pedestrian connection
that serves the same purpose. If more than one of the same use is
within one-quarter mile, only one connection is required to that
particular use.
(3) For pedestrian connections required by Sections (1) and (2) above,
street crossing improvements on Arterials and Collectors are not
required unless determined necessary by the County Engineer to
address a safety issue.
(4) For developments that already have direct, safe and continuous
connections to the two nearest sets of transit stops that are located
either on-site, along the frontage, or off-site, no additional connections
are required.
(5) Through a Type II process, for developments that need an easement
or additional right-of-way to provide a particular connection, the
Review Authority may waive or modify the particular connection
requirement if:
(a) The applicant provides a signed letter from the off-site property
owner that states that the particular easement or right-of-way is
not for sale and is not available; or,
(b) The off-site property owner does not respond to the applicant's
inquiry to purchase an easement or right-of-way. The applicant
shall submit a sworn, notarized statement describing the
applicant's unsuccessful efforts to obtain the easement. Copies
of written correspondence to the off-site property owner shall be
included with the statement.
(6) Through a Type III process, the Review Authority may approve a
modification to, or waiver of, these pedestrian improvemen t
requirements based on a determination that this requirement is
impracticable for one of the following reasons:
(a) The applicant could not obtain necessary easements or
additional right-of-way at a reasonable cost where sufficient
right-of-way to accommodate the interim pedestrian
improvements is unavailable; or
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:43
(b) Topographical, natural resource or other physical circumstances
make it impracticable to construct the interim pedestrian
improvements.
(7) For the purposes of Subsection F., Portland Community College shall
not be required to use its powers of eminent domain to acquire
property or easements to provide for the interim pedestrian network.
G. For purposes of Section 501-10.2 C. (1), (2) and (3)(b) and Section
501-10.2 D, acquisition of land shall be deemed assured if the applicant
provides a deed or an executed and recorded purchase and sale
agreement, land sale contract or similar arrangement and wr itten
documentation that all contingencies identified therein have been resolved
to the satisfaction of the service provider, or a restrictiv e covenant
enforceable by and acceptable to the county and the service provider. An
irrevocable option in favor of and on terms acceptable to the service
provider may be deemed acceptable provided that, at a minimum, the
purchase price, or the mechanism for establishing the price and all other
significant terms are specified.
The Review Authority may impose a condition requiring that the transaction
transferring the delineated land to the service provider be completed prior
to issuance of building permits if the Review Authority concludes that such
a condition is reasonably necessary to ensure that the transaction will, in
fact, be completed.
H. For the purposes of Section 501-10.2 E. and F., an applicant may elect to
use the following process to assure the provision of interim bicycle and
pedestrian improvements prior to preliminary approval:
(1) The development application shall include a statement that the
applicant intends to construct the required improvement(s ) in
conjunction with on-site public streets;
(2) Prior to final approval of the development application, assure the
construction of the required improvement(s); and
(3) Prior to the occupancy of any building in the development, the
required improvement(s) shall be constructed.
I. An adequate Level of Arterial and Collector Roads exists or is assured.
(1) The facilities listed in (2) below, shall be deemed assured only if, in
addition to the requirements of Section 501-8.1 B, the county has
adopted and implemented a North Bethany Transportation
Improvement Financing Resolution and Order that provides adequate
funding over 30 years. Components may include, but are not limited
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:44
to, a supplemental transportation system development charge (SDC)
for North Bethany, commitment of county transportation fun ds,
dedication of Transportation Development Tax (TDT) resources in
the form of revenues and credits, county service district taxes or local
improvement districts.
(2) Capital road improvements:
(a) Road A - western boundary to Joss Road - 3 lanes
(b) Road A - Joss Road to Kaiser Road - 3 lanes
(c) Springville Road - 185th to Joss Road - 5 lanes
(d) Springville Road - Joss Road to Kaiser Road - 3 lanes
(e) Kaiser Road - Road A to Springville Road - 3 lanes
(f) 185th Ave. - Springville Road to West Union Road - 5 lanes
(g) Road A bridge over Rock Creek - half-funded
(h) 185th Ave. - Intersection improvements north of Springville
Road
(i) Kaiser Road - Springville Road to Bethany Blvd. - 3 lanes
(j) Preliminary engineering of the Road A alignment east of Kaiser
Road to Springville Road
(k) Brugger Road - Joss Road to Kaiser Road - build consistent
with neighborhood route standard
(l) Joss Road - Arbor Oaks to Road A - build consistent with
collector standard or neighborhood route
(m) P15 - Springville Road to Brugger Road - build consistent with
neighborhood route standard
J. All roadways shall conform to the requirements of the North Bethany
Subarea Plan and county Road Standards. In the case of conflict, the
Subarea Plan shall control.
(Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22)
501-13 Standards for Development Within the Bonny Slope West subarea of the
Cedar Hills - Cedar Mill Community Plan
501-13.1 Development within the Bonny Slope West subarea shall be subject to all
provisions of Article V, with the exception of Section 501-10 (Standards for
Development Within the North Bethany Subarea Plan Area). In the event of a
conflict with any other provision of Article V, Section 501-13 shall control except
as noted below.
A. Requirements for housing as described under 501-8.1 B (1) are limited as
described under 501-2 through 501-8, except that 501-13.3 A shall apply.
 501PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
V:45
B. Public improvements for Middle Housing Land Divisions (Article VI) shall
be limited as follows:
(1) Street frontage improvement requirements exceeding "Suf ficient
Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106 may be required only where
a resulting lot or parcel abuts the street; and
(2) Where beyond frontage of resulting lots, improvement requirements
shall not exceed those necessary to accommodate "Sufficien t
Infrastructure" as defined in Section 106.
501-13.2 In addition to the provisions identified in Section 501-13.1, except for exempt
development, an application for development approval within the Bonny Slope
West subarea shall be denied unless the applicant demonstrates that:
A. An adequate Level of Arterial and Collector Roads exists or is assured.
(1) The facilities listed in (2) below, shall be deemed assured only if, in
addition to the requirements of Section 501-8.1 B, the county has
adopted and implemented a Bonny Slope West Transportation
Improvement Financing Resolution and Order that provides adequate
funding over 30 years. Components may include, but are not limited
to, a supplemental transportation system development charge (SDC)
for Bonny Slope West, commitment of county transportation funds,
dedication of Transportation Development Tax (TDT) resources in
the form of revenues and credits, county service district taxes or local
improvement districts.
(2) Capital road improvements:
(a) Thompson Road - Saltzman Road to Marcotte Road - 3 lanes
(b) Laidlaw Road - Saltzman Road to existing Marcotte Road
right-of-way - 3 lanes
(c) Marcotte Road - Laidlaw Road to Thompson Road - right-of-way
acquisition for 2 lane collector
(d) Saltzman Road - Laidlaw Road to Thompson Road - interim
improvements to existing alignment
501 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
V:46
501-13.3 In addition to the provisions identified in Sections 501-13.1 and 501-13.2,
except for exempt development, an application for final development approval
within the Bonny Slope West subarea shall be denied unless the applicant
demonstrates that:
A. The property(ies) has been annexed to the following jurisdictions: Clean
Water Services, Metro, Tualatin Hills Park & Recreation District, Tualatin
Valley Fire and Rescue, Tualatin Valley Water District, Enhanced Sheriff's
Patrol District, and Urban Road Maintenance District.
(Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 30.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22)
502 SIDEWALK STANDARDS
