430-84 Middle Housing

This Section provides standards for Middle Housing Duplexes, Triplexes,
Quadplexes, Cottage Clusters, and Townhouses in the R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15,
R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9 NB, R-15 NB, TO: R9-12, TO: R12-18 and TO:
R18-24 districts, that meet the definition of Middle Housing in Section 106 and
comply with Middle Housing standards of this Code. For purposes of this Code,
development of these housing types in other districts, or that does not comply
with the definition and requirements of this Code for Middle Housing, is not
Middle Housing.
Additional standards of this Code apply to all or some Middle Housing, to the
degree specified herein or in the following:
Article III (Land Use Districts);
Section 403-2 (Master Plan - Minimum Requirements for all Development);
Section 406-6 (Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage Facilities);
Section 407-7 (Urban Street Tree Standards);
Section 409 (Private Streets);
Section 410 (Grading and Drainage);
Section 413 (Parking and Loading);
Section 416 (Utility Design);
Section 418 (Setbacks);
Section 421 (Floodplain and Drainage Hazard Areas);
Section 422 (Significant Natural Resources);
Section 430-37 (Detached Dwelling Unit (Single) on Lot of Record, Middle
Housing Duplex, and Type II Middle Housing);
Section 431 (Transit Oriented Design Principles, Standards and Guidelines);
Article V (Public Facilities and Services);
Article VI (Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments).
430-84.1 Middle Housing Types (see definitions and examples in Section 106):
A. Duplex;
B. Triplex;
C. Quadplex;
D. Townhouses;
E. Cottage Cluster;
F. Middle Housing Conversion.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:319Supp. No. 1
430-84.2 Duplex Standards
A. General Standards
(1) Where allowed: In the R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15, R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9
NB, R-15 NB, TO: R9-12, TO: R12-18 or TO: R18-24 district on a lot
where a Single Detached Dwelling Unit is allowable.
(2) Land Use District standards of Article III for Middle Housing shall be
met.
(3) Both units in a Duplex may be on a single lot, or when units are not
attached by a common floor/ceiling, the land may be divided into
separate lots for each unit through a Middle Housing Land Division
meeting applicable provisions of Article VI.
(4) If a building (including all proposed new areas and any areas to be
converted) complies with the definition and standards for both (a) and
(b), below, the application shall specify which is intended:
(a) A Middle Housing Duplex; or
(b) A primary dwelling unit with an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) -
an application for such is not Middle Housing and is not subject
to standards of Section 430-84.
(5) Except in areas subject to Section 421 and/or 422-8, up to one lawful
existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit and up to two lawful existing
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) may be retained as such on the
parent lot, subject to the following:
(a) When the existing home and/or ADU(s) will not be considered
as Middle Housing:
(i) These units will not count toward plex unit maximums (see
district standards, Article III);
(ii) Middle Housing Land Division is not allowable;
(iii) Where any lawful ADU(s) will remain as ADU(s) without
retention of a Single Detached Dwelling Unit, the ADU(s)
may be considered legal nonconforming use(s) pursuant
to Section 430-84.
(b) When the existing home and/or ADU(s) to be retained will all be
considered as Middle Housing:
(i) Any existing dwellings converted to/considered as Middle
Housing shall count toward plex unit maximums of the
district.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:320Supp. No. 1
(ii) A Middle Housing Land Division is allowable subject to
compliance with associated requirements of Article VI.
(6) Where the total of proposed and existing housing units (to be retained)
will not meet minimum density for "Other housing" as specified in
district standards (Article III), all requirements of 430-37.1 B also
apply. Note: Middle Housing is not required to meet minimum density
that applies to other housing types. For purposes of 430-37.1 B, that
density is used only to address feasibility for additional development
in the future.
(7) Requirements specified as applicable under Section 501 shall be
met.
B. Design Standards: Duplexes shall comply with standards of Section
430-37.1 A (1) and (2) or B (5), except where created by addition to or
conversion of an existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit (see 430-84.6).
430-84.3 Triplex and Quadplex Standards
A. General Standards
(1) Where allowed: In the R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15, R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9
NB, R-15 NB, TO: R9-12, TO: R12-18 or TO: R18-24 District on a lot
that meets the minimum lot area required for the proposed Middle
Housing type (Triplex or Quadplex) as specified in standards of the
applicable district (See Article III).
(2) Land Use District standards of Article III for Middle Housing shall be
met.
(3) Retention of existing Accessory Dwelling Unit(s) (ADUs):
(a) If conversion into three or four units is proposed for an existing
Single Detached Dwelling Unit with existing ADU(s), the
applicant shall specify whether the existing ADU(s) is/are:
(i) To be considered Triplex/Quadplex unit(s) (must meet
CDC definition and requirements applicable to that housing
type); or
(ii) To remain as ADU(s), in which case the ADU(s) shall be
considered nonconforming (Section 440).
(b) Where a unit is retained as an ADU, the site is not eligible for a
Middle Housing Land Division (Article VI).
(4) All units in a Triplex or Quadplex may be on a single lot, or where units
are not attached by a common floor/ceiling, the land may be divided
into separate lots for each unit through a Middle Housing Land
Division meeting applicable provisions of Article VI.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:321
(5) Applications must include evidence that Sufficient Infrastructure (as
defined in Section 106) exists or will be completed prior to issuance
of the first occupancy permit. (See requirements for service provider
confirmation in Sections 409, 410 and 501).
(6) Except in areas subject to Section 421 and/or 422-3.3, up to one
lawful existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit and up to two lawful
existing Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) may be retained as such
on the parent lot or parcel, subject to the following:
(a) When the existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit and/or ADU(s)
will not be considered as Middle Housing:
(i) These units will not count toward plex unit maximums (see
district standards, Article III);
(ii) Middle Housing Land Division is not allowable;
(iii) Where any lawful ADU(s) will remain as ADU(s) without
retention of a Single Detached Dwelling Unit, the ADU(s)
may be considered legal nonconforming use(s) pursuant
to Section 430-84.
(b) When the existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit and/or ADU(s)
to be retained will all be considered as Middle Housing:
(i) Any existing dwellings converted to/considered as Middle
Housing shall count toward plex unit maximums of the
district.
(ii) A Middle Housing Land Division is allowable subject to
compliance with associated requirements of Article VI.
(7) Where the total of proposed and existing housing units (to be retained)
will not meet minimum density for "Other housing" as specified in
district standards (Article III), requirements of 430-37.1 B (1) through
(4) also apply.
Note: Middle Housing is not required to meet minimum density that
applies to other housing types. For purposes of 430-37.1 B, that
density is used only to address feasibility for additional development
in the future.
(8) Requirements specified as applicable under Section 501 shall be
met.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:322
B. Design Standards. This section applies to new Triplexes and Quadplexes
created as Middle Housing. Triplexes and Quadplexes created by addition
to or conversion of an existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit (430-84.6)
are not subject to these requirements.
(1) Entry Orientation. At least one main entrance for each Triplex or
Quadplex structure must meet the standards in subsections (a) and
(b) below.
(a) The entrance must be within eight feet of the longest street-facing
wall of the dwelling unit; and
(b) The entrance must either:
(i) Face the street (see Figure 1);
(ii) Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street (see
Figure 2);
(iii) Face a common open space that is adjacent to the street
and is abutted by dwellings on at least two sides (see
Figure 3); or
(iv) Open onto a porch (see Figure 4). The porch must:
• Be at least 25 square feet in area; and
• Have at least one entrance facing the street or have a
roof.
Figure 1. Main Entrance Facing the Street

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:323
Figure 2. Main Entrance at 45° Angle from Street

430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:324
Figure 3. Main Entrance Facing Common Open Space

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:325
Figure 4. Main Entrance Opening onto a Porch

(2) Windows. Windows must be provided on each street-facing façade
as follows:
(a) Front façade:
(i) One story building: At least 12.5% of the total area of the
street-facing façade.
(ii) Building that is two stories or more: 15% of the total area of
the street-facing façade.
(b) Street side yard façade: At least 5% of the total area of the
street-facing façade.
Entrance doors and/or ½ of the window area in the door of an
attached garage may count toward meeting above standards. Plans
shall include dimensions and total area of these elements and of the
affected wall. For attached units, above percentages are per affected
exterior building façade, not per unit. All exterior walls of a building
that face the same direction shall be considered part of the same
façade. Façades separated from the street property line by a dwelling
are exempt from meeting this standard. See Figure 5.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:326
(3) On a corner lot, along the street-side yard, the building façade shall
incorporate at least one of the following features:
(a) A minimum 12-inch offset in the structural exterior building
façade and roofline (see Figure 6). In a building containing
attached units, the offset applies to the overall building façade,
not each unit. All exterior walls of a building that face the same
direction shall be considered part of the same façade;
(b) A minimum of two types of siding materials and/or siding styles.
Figure 5. Window Coverage

Figure 6. Example of 12-inch Offset in Building Façade

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:327
(4) Driveway Approach. Driveway approaches must comply with the
following:
(a) The total width of all driveway approaches must not exceed 32
feet per total frontage of the parent lot, as measured at the
property line (see Figure 7). For lots or parcels with more than
one frontage, see Section (4)(c), below.
(b) Driveway approaches may be separated when located on a
local street or neighborhood route (see Figure 7). If approaches
are separated, they must meet driveway spacing standards of
Section 501-8.5 that apply to the particular road classification.
(c) In addition, lots or parcels with more than one street frontage
must comply with the following:
(i) For lots or parcels abutting an improved alley (defined as
meeting alley width and pavement standards under Section
409-3.3 A), access may be taken from the alley (see
Figure 8).
(ii) A Triplex or Quadplex building on a lot or parcel with
frontages only on collector and/or arterial roads must meet
access spacing standards of Section 501-8.5 B that apply
to the particular road classification.
(iii) A Triplex or Quadplex building on a lot or parcel with
frontages only on local streets and/or neighborhood routes
may have either:
• Two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total
width on one frontage (see Figure 9); or
• One maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach on each
frontage (see Figure 9).
(d) In the event of conflicts between Section 413 and above
provisions, this Section shall prevail.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:328
Figure 7. Driveway Approach Width and Separation on Local St reet or
Neighborhood Route

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:329
Figure 8. Alley Access

430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:330
Figure 9. Driveway Approach Options for Multiple Local Street/Neighborhood
Route Frontages

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:331
430-84.4 Townhouse Standards
A. General Standards
(1) Where allowed: In the R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15, R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9
NB, R-15 NB, TO: R9-12, TO: R12-18 or TO: R18-24 District on a lot
that meets the minimum lot area requirements for Middle Housing
Townhouses, provided that minimum required street frontage (15
feet) can be met for each separate Townhouse (See Article III).
(2) Land Use District standards of Article III for Middle Housing shall be
met.
(3) Each individual Townhouse must be on a separate lot. Separate lots
in a Townhouse development may be created through a Middle
Housing Land Division meeting applicable provisions of Article VI.
(4) Townhouses cannot be approved on a site where any existing ADU
will remain as an ADU.
(5) Applications must include evidence that Sufficient Infrastructure (as
defined in Section 106) exists or will be completed prior to issuance
of the first occupancy permit. (See requirements for service provider
confirmation in Sections 409, 410 and 501).
(6) Areas and improvements owned in common must be maintained by
a homeowners association or other legal entity. A legal document
providing for shared rights, restrictions and maintenance
responsibilities must be recorded and a copy provided prior to
issuance of a building permit.
(7) For consolidated access or shared driveways, evidence of recorded
easements to allow vehicular ingress and egress in favor of all lots
needing access, and allowing emergency access, shall be provided
prior to issuance of the first building permit.
(8) Where proposed units will not meet minimum density for "Other
housing" as specified in district standards (Article III), requirements
of 430-37.1 B (1) though (4) also apply.
Note: Middle Housing is not required to meet minimum density that
applies to other housing types. For purposes of 430-37.1 B, that
density is used only to address feasibility for additional development
in the future.
(9) Requirements specified as applicable under Section 501 shall be
met.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:332
B. Design Standards. New Townhouse buildings are subject to the following
standards. A Townhouse building created by addition to or conversion of
an existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit (430-84.6) is not subject to the
following design standards.
(1) Entry Orientation. The main entrance of each Townhouse must:
(a) Be within eight feet of the longest street-facing wall of the
dwelling unit if the lot has public street frontage; and
(b) Regardless of whether the lot has street frontage, either:
(i) Face the street (see Figure 1);
(ii) Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street (see
Figure 2);
(iii) Face a common open space or private access or driveway
that is abutted by dwellings on at least two sides; or
(iv) Open onto a porch (see Figure 4). The porch must:
• Be at least 25 square feet in area; and
• Have at least one entrance facing the street or have a
roof.
(2) Unit Articulation. Each Townhouse must include at least one of the
following on at least one street-facing façade (see Figure 10):
(a) A roof dormer a minimum of four feet in width;
(b) A balcony a minimum of two feet in depth and four feet in width
and accessible from an interior room;
(c) A bay window that extends from the facade a minimum of two
feet;
(d) An offset of the facade of a minimum of two feet in depth, either
from the neighboring Townhouse or within the façade of a single
Townhouse;
(e) An entryway that is recessed a minimum of three feet;
(f) A covered entryway with a minimum depth of four feet; or
(g) A porch meeting the standards of subsection 430-84.4 B
(1)(b)(iv), above and associated setbacks of the district.
Balconies and bay windows may encroach into a required setback
area.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:333
Figure 10. Townhouse Unit Articulation

(3) Windows. Windows must be provided on each street-facing façade
as follows (See Figure 5):
(a) Front façade:
(i) One story building: At least 12.5% of the total area of the
street-facing façade.
(ii) Building that is two stories or more: 15% of the total area of
the street-facing façade.
(b) Street side yard façade: At least 5% of the total area of the
street-facing façade.
Entrance doors and/or ½ of the window area in the door of an
attached garage may count toward meeting above standards. Plans
shall include dimensions and total area of these elements and of the
affected wall. For attached units, above percentages are per affected
exterior building façade, not per unit. All exterior walls of a building
that face the same direction shall be considered part of the same
façade. Façades separated from the street property line by a dwelling
are exempt from meeting this standard (See Figure 5).
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:334
(4) On a corner lot:
(a) Window requirements of (3), above, apply to each street-facing
façade; and
(b) Along the street side yard, the building shall incorporate at least
one of the following features:
(i) A minimum 12-inch offset in the structural exterior façade
and roofline (See Figure 6). In a building containing
attached units, the offset applies to the overall building
façade, not each unit. All exterior walls of a building that
face the same direction shall be considered part of the
same façade;
(ii) A minimum of two types of siding materials and/or siding
styles.
(5) Driveway Access on a public street is allowed for Townhouses as
follows:
(a) Along frontage of a local street or neighborhood route:
(i) A maximum of one driveway approach is allowed for each
individual Townhouse lot.
(ii) Driveway approaches and/or driveways may be shared as
shown in Figures 11, 12 and 13.
(iii) Townhouse developments may take access from an
improved alley (defined as meeting alley width and
pavement standards under Section 409-3.3 A). (See Figure
8).
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:335
Figure 11. Townhouses with Driveway Approaches on Local
Street/Neighborhood Route Frontage

(b) Where a site has frontage(s) only on collector and/or arterial
road(s):
(i) Access points in a Townhouse development shall be
consolidated into a single driveway, except that additional
consolidated driveways may be allowed subject to full
compliance with spacing standards of 501-8.2 B.
Driveway(s) and approach(es) are not allowed in the area
directly between the front façade and front lot line of any of
the Townhouses. (See Figures 12 and 13).
(ii) No off-street parking shall be allowed in the front yard of a
Townhouse (See Figures 12 and 13).
(iii) Townhouse developments may take access from an
improved alley (defined as meeting alley width and
pavement standards under Section 409-3.3 A). (See Figure
8).
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:336
Figure 12. Townhouses on Corner Lot with Shared Access in Easement

 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:337
Figure 13. Townhouses with Consolidated Access

430-84.5 Cottage Cluster Standards
A. General Standards
(1) Where allowed: In the R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15, R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9
NB, R-15 NB, TO: R9-12, TO: R12-18 or TO: R18-24 District on a lot
that meets the minimum lot area required for a Cottage Cluster
development as outlined in standards of the applicable district (See
Article III).
(2) Land Use Districts standards of Article III for Middle Housing shall be
met.
(3) All units in a Cottage Cluster development may be on a single lot or
the land may be divided into separate lots for each unit through a
Middle Housing Land Division meeting applicable provisions of Article
VI.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:338
(4) Up to 12 cottage units are allowed per common courtyard.
(5) Additional courtyard(s) consistent with (4), above, are required when
a Cottage Cluster development proposes more than 12 units total.
(6) Each cottage unit is limited to a maximum building footprint of 900
square feet. The following do not count toward this maximum:
(a) Up to 200 square feet of an attached garage or carport;
(b) Detached garages, detached carports, or detached accessory
structures;
(c) Trellises; patios; areas of porch, deck, and balcony less than 30
inches from finished grade; cantilevered covers, porches or
projections; ramps and stairways required for access.
(7) The maximum building height for cottages and community buildings
is 25 feet.
(8) The maximum average floor area for a Cottage Cluster is 1,400
square feet per dwelling unit. Floor area is measured for each floor
from the exterior faces of a building or structure. The following do not
count toward the maximum average floor area for Cottage Cluster
units (see Figure 14):
(a) Up to 200 square feet of an attached garage or carport;
(b) Detached garages, detached carports, detached accessory
structures and community buildings that do not meet the
definition of a dwelling unit under Section 106;
(c) Areas where the elevation of the floor is four feet or more below
the adjacent right-of-way;
(d) Roof area;
(e) Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas,
unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches
in height for 75% or more of their perimeter.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:339
Figure 14. Areas Excluded from Floor Area Calculation

(9) An existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit, regardless of its size,
may remain on a lot or parcel with a Cottage Cluster. It shall count as
one cottage in the maximum of units per common courtyard.
(10) Any existing ADU that is retained shall count toward the maximum
number of cottage units per common courtyard; and
(a) The applicant shall specify whether the existing ADU is:
(i) To be considered a cottage (must meet CDC definition and
requirements applicable to that housing type); or
(ii) To remain as an ADU, in which case the ADU shall be
considered nonconforming (Section 440).
(b) Where a unit is retained as an ADU, the site is not eligible for a
Middle Housing Land Division (Article VI).
(11) Applications must include evidence that Sufficient Infrastructure (as
defined in Section 106) exists or will be completed prior to issuance
of the first occupancy permit. (See requirements for service provider
confirmation in Sections 409, 410 and 501).
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:340
(12) Where the total of proposed and existing housing units (to be
retained) will not meet minimum density for "Other housing" as
specified in district standards (Article III), requirements of 430-37.1 B
(1) though (4) also apply.
Note: Middle Housing is not required to meet minimum density that
applies to other housing types. For purposes of 430-37.1 B, that
density is used only to address feasibility for additional development
in the future.
(13) Requirements specified as applicable under Section 501 shall be
met.
B. Design Standards
(1) Cottage Orientation. Cottage Cluster development must meet the
following standards (see Figure 15):
(a) Cottages must be clustered around a common courtyard. Each
cottage within a cluster must either abut the common courtyard
or directly connect to it by a pedestrian path.
(b) A minimum of 50% of cottage units within a cluster must be
oriented to the common courtyard and must:
(i) Have a main entrance facing the common courtyard;
(ii) Be within 10 feet from the common courtyard, measured
from the façade of the cottage to the nearest edge of the
common courtyard; and
(iii) Be connected to the common courtyard by a pedestrian
path.
(c) Cottages within 20 feet of a street property line may have their
primary entrance facing the street.
(d) Cottages not facing the common courtyard or the street must
have their primary entrance facing a pedestrian path that is
directly connected to the common courtyard.
(2) Common Courtyard. Each Cottage Cluster must share a common
courtyard meeting the following standards (see Figure 15):
(a) The common courtyard must be:
(i) A single, contiguous piece.
(ii) A minimum of 150 square feet for each cottage in the
cluster.
(iii) A minimum of 15 feet wide at its narrowest dimension.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:341
(iv) Developed with a mix of landscaping, lawn area, pedestrian
paths, and/or paved courtyard area, and may also include
recreational amenities. Impervious elements of the
common courtyard shall not exceed 75% of the total
common courtyard area.
(v) Bordered by cottages on at least two sides.
(b) Paths that are contiguous to a courtyard shall count toward the
courtyard's minimum dimension and area. Parking areas,
required setbacks, and driveways do not qualify as part of a
common courtyard.
Figure 15. Cottage Cluster Orientation and Common Courtyard Standards

430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:342
(3) Community Buildings. Cottage Cluster projects may includ e
community buildings for the shared use of residents, that provide
space for accessory uses such as community meeting rooms, guest
housing, exercise rooms, day care, or community eating areas.
Community buildings must meet the following standards:
(a) Each Cottage Cluster is permitted one community building;
(b) A community building that meets the definition of a dwelling unit
(Section 106) is limited to the maximum footprint of 900 square
feet that applies to a cottage, and counts toward the maximum
1,400 square foot average for cottages, unless a restriction is
recorded against the property stating that the structure is not a
legal dwelling unit and will not be used as a primary dwelling. A
copy of the proposed restriction must be submitted with the
development application and evidence of its recordation
provided prior to issuance of the first building permit;
(c) A community building that meets the definition of a dwelling unit
(Section 106) shall be counted as one unit in the maximum per
common courtyard, unless the restriction noted in (3)(b), above,
is recorded. Other community buildings shall not count toward
the maximum units per courtyard.
(4) Pedestrian Access.
(a) An accessible pedestrian path must be provided that connects
the main entrance of each cottage to the following:
(i) The common courtyard;
(ii) Shared parking areas;
(iii) Community buildings; and
(iv) Sidewalks in public rights-of-way abutting the site; or to
rights-of-way if there are no sidewalks.
(b) The pedestrian path must be hard-surfaced and a minimum of
four feet wide.
(5) Windows. Cottages within 20 feet of a street property line must meet
the window coverage requirement that applies to a Single Detached
Dwelling Unit or Duplex under 430-37.1 A (1).
(6) Parking Design (see Figure 16).
(a) Clustered parking. Off-street parking may be clustered, subject
to the following standards:
(i) Cottage Cluster developments with fewer than 16 cottages
are permitted parking clusters of not more than five
contiguous spaces.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:343
(ii) Cottage Cluster developments with 16 cottages or more
are permitted parking clusters of not more than eight
contiguous spaces.
(iii) Parking clusters must be separated from each other by at
least four feet of landscaping.
(iv) Clustered parking areas may be covered.
(b) Parking location and access (see Figure 16).
(i) Off-street parking spaces and vehicle maneuvering areas
shall not:
• Be located within 20 feet of any street property line,
except alley property lines. This standard does not apply
to an individual or combined driveway on a local street or
neighborhood route that serves the garage(s) of up to
two cottage units;
• Be located between a street property line and the front
façade of cottages located closest to the street property
line. This standard does not apply along alley property
lines or to an individual or combined driveway on a local
street or neighborhood route that serves the garage(s)
of up to two cottage units;
• Directly abut a shared courtyard.
(ii) Off-street parking spaces shall not be located within five
feet of any other property line. This standard does not
apply along alley property lines or to an individual or
combined driveway on a local street or neighborhood
route that serves the garage(s) of up to two cottage units.
Driveways and drive aisles are permitted within five feet of
other property lines.
(c) Garages, carports and accessory structures.
(i) Carports (whether shared or individual) must not abut
common courtyards.
(ii) An accessory structure must not exceed 400 square feet
in floor area (not applicable to a detached garage or
community building).
(7) An existing Single Detached Dwelling Unit may remain on a lot or
parcel with a Cottage Cluster. The existing dwelling:
(a) May be lawfully nonconforming with respect to standards of this
code.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:344
(b) May be expanded up to the maximum building footprint in
Section 430-84.5 A (6) or the maximum height in Section
430-84.5 A (7); however, an existing dwelling that exceeds
these maximums may not be expanded.
(c) Shall be excluded from the calculation required under Section
430-84.5 B (1)(b).
(d) Shall not count toward the maximum average floor area for
cottages.
(e) Is not subject to design standards of Section 430-84, including
any expansions.
 430DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
IV:345
Figure 16. Cottage Cluster Parking Design Standards

430-84.6 Middle Housing Conversion Standards
A. General Standards
(1) Where allowed: Conversions to Middle Housing are allowed in the
R-5, R-6, R-9, R-15, R-24, R-25+, R-6 NB, R-9 NB, R-15 NB, TO:
R9-12, TO: R12-18 or TO: R18-24 Districts.
(2) Additions to, or conversions of, an existing Single Detached Dwelling
Unit into Middle Housing must not increase nonconformance with
applicable clear and objective standards.
430 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
IV:346
B. Design standards: Not Applicable.
(Ord. No. 885A, § 2.1.(Exh. 1, § 27.), 6-28-22, eff. 7-28-22; Ord. No. 890A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1,
§§ 1., 23.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23; Ord. No. 902A, § 2.B.(Exh. 2, § 38.), 11-5-24, eff. 12-5-24)
