377 SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT (SID)
377-1 Purpose and Intent
377-1.1 The purpose of the Special Industrial Overlay District is:
A. To protect and enhance development opportunities for industrial uses
which may require large sites in a planned campus industrial park setting;
B. To provide the opportunity for small and medium size industrial uses to
locate in proximity to large single user industrial uses;
C. To provide an opportunity for the market place to demonstrate actual
development through the industrial lot size requirements demanded by
industrial uses;
D. To preserve large lots for single major industrial uses until such a time as
there is no demonstrated demand or need for such large lots.
377-1.2 The intent of the Special Industrial Overlay District is to recognize the need to
provide large lots for single major industrial uses while recognizing that small
and medium sized industrial uses may require siting in proximity to large uses in
order to service such large uses. Additionally, the Special Industrial Overlay
District recognizes the potential employment growth opportunities of small and
medium industrial uses and provides a stable planned campus industrial park
atmosphere which may accommodate such firms as employment and site size
requirements change through time.
377-1.3 For the above reasons, development in the Special Industrial Overlay District is
limited to the following categories of mutually compatible uses which require a
park-like setting:
A. High technology, light manufacturing, research and devel opment,
processing, storage and distribution;
B. Freestanding offices, under Sections 377-5.2 and 377-5.3 only; and
C. Planned industrial parks containing light manufacturing uses and related
service and trade activities.
377-2 Terms and Definitions
For the purposes of this Overlay District (Section 377), the following definitions
shall apply:
377-2.1 Special Industrial Overlay District
An overlay district which may be applied in addition to the industrial designation
in which additional provisions apply for the purpose of creating a unique setting.
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:267
377-2.2 SID Process
The procedure, as codified in the Special Industrial Overlay District Section,
whereby tiers are established within the overlay district.
377-2.3 Committed Development
A. An arms length transfer of ownership, or a lease or build-to-lease agreement
between two legal entities based upon fair market value, including term of
payment, and not for the purposes of circumventing the requirements of
this Code.
(1) Fair market value will be based on demonstration by the applicant of
the value of three comparable planned and designated industrial
sites, comparable in size, services and natural features. The fair
market value of the applicant's site must prove to be within 25% of the
average value of the three comparable sites; or
(2) For ground-lease arrangements or the transfer of ownership on lots
of 30 acres or greater, committed development may be demonstrated
based upon the appraisal of real property. The appraisal shall be
performed within the following conditions:
(a) Washington County shall make available to the applicant a list
of three M.A.I. certified appraisers;
(b) The applicant shall select one from the list provided;
(c) Washington County shall contract the appraiser for the purposes
of demonstrating compliance with the terms of Committed
Development;
(d) The applicant shall reimburse Washington County for costs
incurred on the appraisal.
(3) Approval of a Building Siting and Architectural Design application
under the requirements of Section 406 of this Code that demonstrates
full commitment of the subject area to complete urban development
consistent with the provisions of the SID such that no furthe r
parcelization is or will be required.
B. The applicant may prove committed development, by demonstrating that
the area has been physically improved, by providing copies of building
permits for allowed buildings where such buildings demonst rate full
commitment of the subject area to complete urban development consistent
with the provisions of the SID such that no further parcelization is or will be
required.
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:268
377-2.4 Tier
An area of land within a Special Industrial Overlay District delineated in the
Master Plan-Site Analysis process and designated for a cert ain level of
development activity according to prescribed conditions within the overlay
district.
377-2.5 Industrial Park
A planned industrial development designed as a coordinated environment for a
variety and mix of industrial and industrial support uses, having a comprehensive
development plan which ensures compatibility among uses and with adjacent
properties, which occurs on a parcel or adjacent parcels under single ownership
or development control.
377-2.6 Gross Area
The total land area within the SID boundary, including development which
existed prior to the establishment of the district, expressed in acres or fractions
thereof.
377-2.7 Net Buildable Area
The total land area within the SID, excluding present and future rights-of-way,
restricted hazard areas, public open space, floodplain, bodies of water, and
restricted resource protection areas, expressed in acres or portions thereof.
377-3 Designation of Special Industrial Overlay District
The Special Industrial Overlay District shall be designated on the community
plan maps through the community planning process, through the plan update
process or through a plan amendment under the policies and criteria set forth in
the Comprehensive Plan.
377-4 Standards
These standards apply in addition to the general provisions of the Industrial
District.
377-4.1 Within the Industrial District, a contiguous area of largely undeveloped land of
50 or more acres may be designated Special Industrial Overlay District (SID) on
the community plan map through line application of the overlay. Areas are
considered contiguous even if separated by streets, roads, easements and
natural features. Areas designated SID should have adequate and convenient
access to an arterial and should have relatively few separate ownerships to
facilitate consolidation.
377-4.2 Prior to the issuance of any development permit, the Master Plan-Site Analysis
must be processed and approved for the entire SID. The Master Plan-Site
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:269
Analysis is to be considered a schematic commitment of three-tier types to
certain levels of use and minimum lot size. It does not require the legal
partitioning of the three tiers into three lots, nor does it require the subdivision of
lots with the tiers until such a time as development occurs.
A. This does not, however, preclude an applicant from submitting a Master
Plan-Site Analysis for the SID which would include all possible tiers.
Where such a Plan is submitted and approved, all remaining tiers shall be
processed under a Type I procedure as long as the subsequent application
is consistent with the Plan initially approved. If an application is determined
to be inconsistent with the initial plan approval, a Type II procedure shall be
followed.
B. The Master Plan, once approved, is binding on the property a nd
development may occur only under the conditions of the SID provisions,
regardless of ownership.
C. All variances under Section 435 (Variances and Adjustment s) are
specifically prohibited in this district.
377-4.3 Within the SID, development shall conform to the following requirements
regardless of ownership pattern. Development within the SID may occur under
only one of the following two options:
A. Option A - 30-Acre Minimum Lot Size:
Through the Site Analysis, processed as a Type II procedure, lots may be
partitioned or subdivided to a 30 acre minimum lot size for the use of a
single major industrial user, a user which requires or will ultimately require
a total of at least 30 acres for its operation. Uses permitted on such parcels
are those listed in Sections 377-5.1 through 377-5.2. Industrial Parks are
not permitted.
B. Option B - SID Process:
Under the utilization of this option, a Site Analysis shall be submitted for the
entire area covered by the SID which shall be processed through a Type III
procedure without the flexibility permitted under that process but instead
with the flexibility permitted herein. The Site Analysis shall designate three
tiers as described in "C" below.
C. Descriptions:
(1) Tier I
A maximum 20% of the initial gross acreage of the SID as delineated
on the community plan map with a two-acre minimum lot size and
uses permitted as listed in Sections 377-5.1, 377-5.2 and 377-5.3.
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:270
(2) Tier II
A maximum 20% of the SID gross acreage with a minimum lot size of
ten acres and uses permitted as listed in Sections 377-5.1, 377-5.2
and 377-5.3.
(3) Tier III
A minimum 60% of the SID with a 30 acre minimum lot size and uses
permitted as listed in Sections 377-5.1 and 377-5.2.
377-4.4 Under Option B, SID Process (Section 377-4.3 B.), the following development
conditions shall be available at the initiation of an applicant, once prescribed
conditions have been met:
A. Committed Development Adjustment:
(1) Tier I
(a) Following the development of 67% of the net acreage in Tier I,
an applicant may initiate a petition to permit Standard Land
Division down to a five-acre minimum lot size in Tier II. Uses
permitted shall continue as prescribed for Tier II.
(b) The application shall be a Site Analysis application and shall be
processed through a Type II procedure with the applicant
demonstrating that the 67% development condition has been
met and is in compliance with other applicable standards of this
Code.
(2) Tier II
Following the development of 67% of the combined net acreage in
Tier I and Tier II of the first SID, an applicant may petition for a second
SID on any vacant area of 50 acres or greater in Tier III. Such an
application shall be made as a Site Analysis application and shall be
processed through a Type II procedure unless previously approved
under Section 377-4.2 A., then it shall be processed as a Type I. The
burden of demonstrating that 67% development of Tier I and II has
been met and is in compliance with the applicable standards of this
Code rests on the applicant.
B. Additional Tiers:
The total number of times the SID process of creating new tiers may be
applied is determined by the formula below:
 Formula:  Gross Acreage of SID
50 Acres = Maximum Number times the SID Process may be
applied
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:271
Example:  210 Gross Acres
50 Acres = 4.2 times

Result: The SID process may be applied four times in this Special Industrial
District creating a potential total of 9 final tiers.
Note: If the formula results in a fraction 0.5 or above, an additional SID
process may occur if the conditions in Section 377-4.4 C. can be met.
C. Final SID:
When the SID has been legally applied, and when in subsequent
applications, Tiers I and II have been 67% or more developed, and when
the option of going through one additional SID process to create an
additional set of tiers remains except the remaining acreage in Tier III is
less than the 50-acre minimum required for application of an SID, then any
vacant buildable land remaining in Tiers I and II from previous tier phases
may be added to Tier III to create a 50-acre parcel for the application of an
additional SID with the following limitations:
(1) No more than a combined total of five acres of vacant buildable land
may be transferred from Tiers I and II of the previous phase for such
purposes;
(2) Land so transferred must be contiguous and incorporated into the
overall design of the SID in a cohesive and comprehensive manner
which lends itself to the orderly provision of services and creates
compatible lotting patterns and uses of land; and
(3) Such a transfer shall occur through a Type I lot line adjustment.
D. Expansion of Existing, Contiguous Industrial Development
(1) When an existing, approved industrial use requires expansion to a
contiguous area, and when such expansion can only occur on the
last remaining 30-acre parcel within the SID as a result of other
contiguous areas being fully committed to development, the use of
the last remaining 30-acre parcel within the SID for industr ial
expansion will be permitted under the following conditions:
(a) Expansion must be from a contiguous, existing industrial
development;
(b) The proposed expansion involves a single-user industrial use;
(c) The proposed expansion will require a minimum of five acres;
(d) The proposed expansion will not create a remaining lot of less
than five acres in the last remaining 30-acre parcel;
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:272
(e) No further parcelization of the lot used for expansion shall be
permitted; and
(f) The above described process shall occur through a Type II lot
line adjustment. The expansion under these provisions shall not
create a new, separate lot, but rather shall be an addition to the
previous lot.
(2) Once the entire SID, as designated by the Community Plan, has
been developed to 67% of its potential and one 30-acre parcel in Tier
III remains vacant and cannot meet the conditions set forth in 377-4.4
C., the SID restrictions on that 30-acre parcel and remaining buildable
vacant land within the SID may be removed, with the exception of the
use provisions of the SID, through the Plan Amendment process
under the conditions of Strategy s under Policy #1 of the
Comprehensive Framework Plan.
377-4.5 Special Conditions
A. Preexisting Lots:
(1) Preexisting lots within the boundary of an SID shall be considered as
a part of the appropriate Tier of the first SID based upon their lot size.
(2) The lot size of any preexisting lot shall be maintained until the Master
Plan-Site Analysis for the entire SID is made, at which time it may be
partitioned into lots which meet the minimum lot size permitted in the
Tier in which it is included.
(3) Development on preexisting lots shall be preceded by a Master
Plan-Site Analysis application for the entire SID.
B. Once the initial application of tiers within the SID process has occurred,
that is, the Master Plan-Site Analysis has been approved, identifying the
three tiers, and once development occurs on any part of the SID under the
approved Master Plan, the tiers become fixed and cannot be transferred or
altered except as permitted by the provisions of the SID, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Trades
In the event a landowner has an opportunity to sell, lease or
lease-to-build a vacant parcel or vacant parcels previously approved
as part of Tier I, II or III, and the purchaser or lessee desires the
parcel(s) to be located in a tier of SID not previously contemplated
and approved for that lot size or location, the landowner may petition
for a lot location trade within the SID.
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:273
A parcel location trade shall involve only vacant buildable lands and
such a trade shall involve equal amounts of land such that the net
results of potential lot parcelization is exactly equal to what it would
be both before and after such a trade. The adjustment shall be
approved if the parcel locations resulting from the trade can be
incorporated into the overall design of the SID in a cohesive manner
which lends itself to acceptable patterns and uses of land. Parcel
location trades will be processed as a Type I procedure.
Notwithstanding any other parcel procedure, lot line adjustments
shall be processed as a trade.
C. Mortgage Lot in a Special Industrial District
The creation of a mortgage lot within the Special Industrial District may be
considered through a Type I procedure subject to the following cited
limitations:
(1) The proposed mortgage lot shall be limited to and located in Tier III of
an approved Special Industrial Overlay District;
(2) The parent lot, from which the mortgage lot is to be created, shall be
a lawfully created lot located in Tier III of an approved Special
Industrial Overlay District;
(3) The parent and mortgage lot shall both have legal access;
(4) The proposed mortgage lot shall be a minimum of ten acres in size;
(5) An affidavit, approved as to form by County Counsel, shall be
completed, signed, notarized and filed with the Department of
Assessment & Taxation, Recording Division, stating that the applicant
agrees:
(a) That in the event of a sale or transfer, both lots will be sold
simultaneously as a unit to the same buyer,
(b) That the mortgage lot and the balance of the parent lot will be
consolidated into one tax lot as soon as the applicant secures
title to either, and in the event of foreclosure, the balance of the
parent lot becomes unbuildable unless subject to the benefits
accruing through a valid reiteration of a subsequent Special
Industrial Overlay District approval.
(6) A lawfully created lot in Tier III of an approved Special Industrial
Overlay District shall be eligible for only one mortgage lot at any point
in time.
(Ord. No. 889A, § 2.C.(Exh. 3, § 1.), 2-7-23, eff. 3-9-23)
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:274
377-5 Uses Permitted
The following lists of uses are uses which may be permitted under the review
procedure indicated except when the particular use has been reviewed and
approved through the Master Plan-Site Analysis process for a specific location
within the SID, then the application for a development permit for the approved
use shall be a Type I procedure unless the use has been changed in location,
nature and size.
377-5.1 Uses Permitted Through a Type I Procedure:
A. Accessory Uses and Structures - Section 430-1.
B. Temporary Use - Section 430-135.
C. Bus Shelter - Section 430-23.
D. Recycle Drop Box - Section 430-113.
E. Uses which are exempt from the Public Facilities standards as specified in
Section 501-2 of this Code.
F. New Telecommunication Facilities with towers not using Stealth Design
that:
(1) Do not exceed a maximum height of 65 feet; and
(2) Are located on a lot or parcel of which less than 50% of the perimeter
abuts a residential district. For the purpose of this subsection, lots or
parcels that are separated from the proposed site by an existing or
dedicated public or private street or right-of-way shall be considered
as abutting the perimeter of the proposed site - Section 430-109.
G. Co-location of antennas, excluding those antennas exempt pursuant to
Sections 430-109.3 and, 201-2.30 - Section 430-109.
H. New Telecommunication Facilities with towers using Steal th Design,
excluding those towers exempt pursuant to Sections 430-109.3 and
201-2, that:
(1) Do not exceed a maximum height of 65 feet when utilizing Stealth
Design; or
(2) Do not exceed the height maximum for Small Wireless Facilities, as
defined in Section 430-109.2 - Section 430-109.
377-5.2 Uses Permitted Through a Type II Procedure:
A. Development, manufacture or assembly of:
(1) Communication equipment, electronic equipment and supplies;
(2) Scientific and precision instruments and equipment;
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:275
(3) Engineering laboratory, scientific and research instruments; and
(4) Electromedical apparatus, biomedical, surgical and medi cal
instruments, artificial limbs, hearing aids, dentures, ophthalmic goods,
and other medical or dental devices.
B. Research and Development:
(1) Research and development laboratories; and
(2) Industrial trade or skill schools and training centers.
C. Processing and Storage of:
(1) Photographic laboratories, blue printing, photoengravi ng,
photocopying, printing, publishing and bookbinding, including on-site
commercial service associated with said use;
(2) Wholesale business, storage buildings and warehouses; and
(3) Storage and distribution.
D. Construction of a local street not in conjunction with a development
application or within existing right-of-way.
E. New Telecommunication Facilities with towers greater than 65 feet and up
to 200 feet in height - Section 430-109.
F. Uses Accessory and Incidental to an Allowed Use, not Otherwise Permitted
by Section 377-5.1 E.:
(1) Garages for storage and maintenance of motor vehicles used by the
principal use;
(2) Storage of motor fuels and lubricating oils for vehicles used by the
principal use;
(3) Maintenance and utility shops for equipment used by the principal
use;
(4) Central heating, air conditioning and refrigeration plants;
(5) Water storage, drainage and treatment facilities;
(6) Fire protection facilities;
(7) Educational facilities;
(8) Buildings for storage of documents, records, testing and research
equipment, experimental models and other personal property related
to the principal use;
(9) Clinics, cafeterias, lounges and recreational facilities for employees;
(10) Living quarters for custodians and caretakers;
(11) Rental and development information offices;
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:276
(12) Laundry facilities;
(13) Electrical substations;
(14) Administrative offices related to the principal use;
(15) Day-care facility primarily for use by employees and their families;
and
(16) Retail outlets for warehousing or manufacturing operations, limited
to 10 percent of total floor area. The retail area shall be physically
separated, by a wall or other barrier, from warehousing and or
manufacturing operations. Warehousing and storage areas shall not
be used as showrooms.
G. Expansion of Existing Telecommunication Facilities, including co-located
antennas, not otherwise allowed through a Type I Procedure pursuant to
Section 430-109.5 or exempt pursuant to Sections 430-109.3 and 201-2 -
Section 430-109.
377-5.3 Uses Which May be Permitted Within an Industrial Park:
A. Industrial parks may be established within the Special Industrial Overlay
District on a minimum of 10 contiguous acres in Tier I or II under a Type III
Master Plan-Primary Use Procedure with the flexibility of s tandards
provided for in the Master Plan-Primary Uses provisions onl y. The
application for the Industrial Park may be processed simultaneously with
the application for establishing the tiers through the SID, as a Master
Plan-Primary Use application.
B. Specific uses may be approved through this process if the nature, size and
location of the use is identified and the public facilities standards of Section
501 are met. If approved through the Master Plan application, such uses
will be eligible for a development permit through a Type I procedure. Uses
not approved in this manner or uses which are changed after approval of
the Master Plan application shall be reviewed through a Type II Procedure
prior to issuance of a development permit.
C. All uses listed in Sections 377-5.1 and 377-5.2 may be permitted within
industrial parks. Uses listed under Section 377-5.4 may be permitted
through the Type III procedure. Additional uses may also be permitted in
industrial parks under the following conditions:
(1) The minimum lot size shall conform to the appropriate tier, except
each SID as defined by the Community Plan is permitted one 1-acre
minimum lot size lot for one use listed in Section 377-5.2 C. (3) and
one 1-acre minimum lot size lot for one use listed in Section 377-5.3
C. (7)(a).
 377LAND USE DISTRICTS
III:277
(2) The building floor area shall be determined based on buildings in
existence at the time of application together with buildings for uses
approved through the application.
(3) The maximum ground floor building area shall in no case exceed the
maximum allowed by computing the total permitted building floor
area in the industrial park based on the lot coverage allowed.
(4) No more than 15% of the combined total ground floor building area
within the industrial park may be utilized for the uses specified in (6)
and (7) below to insure the primary character of the district remains
industrial.
(5) Such uses shall be limited to a scale to serve persons working in the
Special Industrial Overlay District and only secondarily to serve
residents in the area. Such uses are limited to a maximum building
floor area size of 5,000 square feet per business premise.
(6) Uses which may be permitted under the aforementioned conditions
through a Type II procedure:
(a) Restaurant, delicatessen or cafeteria primarily for employees if
located on an interior street within the industrial park;
(b) Recreation facilities, indoor or outdoor exercise facili ties,
primarily for employees; and
(c) Day-care facilities primarily for employee families.
(7) No more than 25% of the combined total ground floor building area
within the industrial park may be utilized for the following office uses
in order to maintain the primarily industrial character of the district.
These uses shall be supportive of or related to the permitted industrial
uses in the SID. Free standing office buildings must be occupied by
a single tenant which utilizes at least 25% of the gross building floor
area. Uses which may be permitted under the above conditions
through a Type II procedure:
(a) Offices for financial institutions, banks and credit unions; and
(b) Professional offices for accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
architectural; engineering including surveying; medical; law;
other professional uses.
377-5.4 Uses Which May be Permitted Through a Type III Procedure.
The following uses may be permitted subject to the specific standards for the
use set forth below and in applicable Special Use Sections of Section 430, as
well as the general standards for the district, the Development Standards of
Article IV and all other applicable standards of the Code. The Review Authority
377 WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
III:278
shall make specific findings with respect to the use being compatible to the
intent and purpose of the district. Approval may be further conditioned by the
Review Authority pursuant to Section 207-6.
A. Parcel Delivery Service.
B. Government and Special District Facilities.
C. Transit Stations or Park and Ride Lots - Sections 430-89 and 430-137.
D. Public Utility - Section 430-105.
E. Heliport - Section 430-59.
F. Solid Waste Transfer Station - Section 430-129.
G. New Telecommunication Facilities with towers greater than 200 feet in
height - Section 430-109.
(Ord. No. 826A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1, § 27), 10-24-17, eff. 11-24-17; Ord. No. 856A, § 2.A.(Exh. 1,
§ 26), 10-22-19, eff. 11-28-19)
