Close
Print
Resize:

City of Tigard, OR

[print date]

Title 18. Development Code

Part 18.200. RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Chapter 18.210. Residential General Provisions

§ 18.210.010. Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards that are broadly applicable to all residential development in residential and commercial zones.

(Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1)

§ 18.210.020. Fence and Wall Standards.

Fences and walls may be located within required setbacks. Fences and walls located within required setbacks are subject to the standards in this section. Fences and walls located outside required setbacks are subject to the standards in the applicable housing type chapter in 18.200 Residential Development Standards.

A.

Fences and walls in a required front setback may be a maximum of 3 feet in height where abutting a local or neighborhood street and a maximum of 6 feet in height where abutting a collector or arterial street.

B.

Fences and walls in a required side, street side, or rear setback may be a maximum of 8 feet in height. Fences and walls 7 feet or more in height require a building permit.

C.

Fences and walls with barbed or razor wire are prohibited.

D.

Fences and walls must meet vision clearance area requirements in Chapter 18.930, Vision Clearance Areas.

(Ord. 18-28 §1)

§ 18.210.030. Exceptions to Setback and Height Standards.

A.

Additional setbacks. Increased or different setbacks apply in the following situations:

1.

Where the ultimate right-of-way width, as shown in the Transportation System Plan, is wider than the current right-of-way width, required setbacks are measured from the ultimate right-of-way width.

2.

Where freestanding private communication and utility facilities that are accessory to a residential use and not subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.450, Wireless Communication Facilities, are proposed, such facilities must be set back from all property lines a distance equal to or greater than the height of the facility. Freestanding communication and utility facilities include, but are not limited to, wind turbines and communication towers, antennas, and receivers.

B.

Exceptions to minimum setbacks.

1.

Freestanding mechanical equipment, such as heating and cooling equipment, may be located within any required setback, except that equipment serving apartment developments is subject to the standards in Chapter 18.230, Apartments.

2.

Required setbacks for all buildings, except garages, may be reduced for the purpose of preserving healthy noninvasive trees. Required front setbacks may be reduced by a maximum of 25 percent, and other required setbacks may be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.

3.

Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, canopies, or similar architectural features may project a maximum of 3 feet into a required setback provided the projection does not reduce the width of any setback to less than 3 feet.

4.

Fireplaces and chimneys may project a maximum of 3 feet into a required setback provided the projection does not reduce the width of any setback to less than 3 feet.

5.

Unroofed porches, decks, or balconies 3 feet or less in height may project into a required rear or side setback provided the projection does not reduce the width of any setback to less than 3 feet. Unroofed porches may project a maximum of 3 feet into a required front setback.

6.

Unroofed landings or stairs may project into a required front or rear setback.

7.

Inground swimming pools may project into a required rear or side setback provided the projection does not reduce the width of any setback to less than 5 feet.

8.

Bay windows and projections with floor area may project into a required interior side or street side setback by 1 foot provided the projections do not:

a.

Exceed 12 feet in length;

b.

Contain over 30 percent of the dwelling unit side elevation square footage; and

c.

Reduce the width of the interior side setback to less than 3 feet.

9.

The front setback of the front facade of the primary structure may be reduced to the average of the respective setbacks on the abutting lots using the method in Section 18.40.070. Garage setbacks may not be reduced.

C.

Exception to maximum height. Building projections not designed for human occupancy are not subject to the building height limitations of this title. Building projections not designed for human occupancy include, but are not limited to, chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, flag poles, and antennas and receivers not subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.450, Wireless Communication Facilities.

(Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1; Ord. 20-01 §1)

§ 18.210.040. Solar Installations.

A.

Accessory solar equipment.

1.

Solar panels and energy storage systems that are accessory to a primary use, such as solar roofs, solar carports, ground-mounted solar installations smaller than 528 square feet, or solar batteries are allowed.

2.

Accessory solar equipment as described in Paragraph 18.210.040.A.1 is exempt from maximum height, maximum lot coverage, and minimum or maximum setback requirements as provided elsewhere in this title.

B.

Basic Utility. Standalone solar panel arrays on a site without other development are considered a Basic Utility as defined in Section 18.60.050.

(Ord. No. 24-05, 4/23/2024)
