Close
Print
Resize:

City of Tigard, OR

[print date]

Title 18. Development Code

Part 18.100. BASE ZONES

Chapter 18.140. Parks and Recreation Zone

§ 18.140.010. Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and enhance publicly-owned open space and natural and improved parkland within the city. This zone is intended to serve many functions including:

A.

Providing opportunities for both active and passive recreational facilities to meet neighborhood, community, and regional needs;

B.

Providing contrast to the built environment;

C.

Providing opportunities to strengthen community identity, improve public health, and foster interactions between citizens;

D.

Providing economic development by creating a desirable public image and robust quality of life;

E.

Recognizing that publicly-owned parks have a special relationship to the community and are an important resource;

F.

Providing flexibility in the use and development of recreational facilities as the city responds to changes in demographics, program needs, and external regulatory requirements; and

G.

Allowing for the efficient implementation of plans and improvements to parks, recreational facilities, and open areas with appropriate reviews where compatibility issues may arise.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1)

§ 18.140.020. Applicability.

The Parks and Recreation (PR) zone is applicable to all city-owned lands intended as parks, open space, and recreational facilities and may be applied within all comprehensive plan designations. City-owned parks, open space, and recreational facilities located in a plan district may retain or receive other than a PR zone designation if it better furthers the goals of the plan district. In addition, other public agencies may request a PR zone designation for areas that meet the purpose of the zone.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1)

§ 18.140.030. Other Zoning Regulations.

Sites with overlay zones, plan districts, inventoried hazards, or sensitive lands are subject to additional regulations. Specific uses or developments may also be subject to regulations as provided elsewhere in this title.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1)

§ 18.140.040. Land Use Standards.

A.

General provisions. A list of allowed, restricted, conditional, and prohibited uses in the PR zone is provided in Table 18.140.1. If a use category is not listed, see Section 18.60.030.

1.

Allowed (A). Uses that are allowed, subject to all of the applicable provisions of this title.

2.

Restricted (R). Uses that are subject to special requirements, exceptions, or restrictions as provided in Subsection 18.140.030.B.

3.

Conditional (C). Uses that require the approval of the Hearings Officer using discretionary criteria. The approval process and criteria are provided in Chapter 18.740, Conditional Uses.

4.

Prohibited (P). Uses that are not allowed under any circumstance.

Table 18.140.1 Parks and Recreation Zone Use Standards  Table 18.140.1 Parks and Recreation Zone Use Standards
Use Categories                                          PR
Residential Use Category                                Residential Use Category
Residential Use                                         P
Civic Use Categories                                    Civic Use Categories
Basic Utility                                           R/C
Cemetery                                                P
Detention Facility                                      P
Government Services                                     C
Railroad Yard                                           P
School or Religious Facility                            P
Temporary Shelter                                       P
Transportation and Utility Corridor                     R
Wireless Communications Facility                        R
Commercial Use Categories                               Commercial Use Categories
Adult Entertainment                                     P
Commercial Lodging                                      P
Indoor Sales and Services                               R
Major Event Entertainment                               C
Mobility Hub                                            C
Motor Vehicle Fuel Sales                                P
Motor Vehicle Sales and Rental                          P
Motor Vehicle Servicing and Repair                      P
Non-Accessory Parking                                   P
Office                                                  R
Outdoor Sales and Services                              R
Self-Service Storage                                    P
Industrial Use Categories                               Industrial Use Categories
Industrial and Manufacturing                            P
Off-Site Services                                       P
Warehouse and Distribution                              P
Waste-Related Facility                                  P
Wholesale and Equipment Rental                          P

A = Allowed
C = Conditional Use
P = Prohibited

B.

PR zone use restrictions:

1.

Basic Utility.

a.

Above-ground public and private utility facilities proposed with development and underground public and private utility facilities are allowed.

b.

Standalone above-ground public and private utility facilities not proposed with development, including standalone solar arrays, are conditionally allowed.

2.

Transportation and utility corridor. Active transportation facilities are allowed, all other uses are conditionally allowed.

3.

Wireless communications facility. See Chapter 18.450, Wireless Communication Facilities, for allowed and restricted facilities.

4.

Indoor sales and services. This use is allowed only when accessory to a Government Services use.

5.

Office. This use is allowed only when accessory to a Government Services use.

6.

Outdoor sales and services. This use is allowed only when accessory to a Government Services use.

C.

Allowed development. When associated with a Government Services use, the following types of development are allowed provided it complies with the development standards and other regulations of this title. Site development review is not required for the types of development listed below. All other applicable land use reviews apply.

1.

Park furnishings such as play equipment, picnic tables, benches, bicycle racks, public art, trash receptacles, and other improvements of a similar nature.

2.

Fences.

3.

Off-street, multi-use trails.

4.

Structures up to 600 square feet in size, and no more than 15 feet high.

5.

Picnic areas designed to accommodate groups of less than 25.

6.

Outdoor recreational fields, courts, arenas, and other structures when not illuminated and not designed or intended for organized sports and competitions.

7.

Community gardens up to 5,000 square feet in size.

8.

Routine maintenance or replacement of existing facilities.

D.

Development subject to conditional use review. The following types of development are allowed subject to conditional use permit approval, as provided in Chapter 18.740, Conditional Uses.

1.

Pools and aquatic centers, both indoor and outdoor.

2.

Community and senior centers providing a focus for recreational, social, education, and cultural activities. These may include gymnasiums, indoor tracks and fitness areas, meeting rooms, office and kitchen space, and other amenities designed for community use.

3.

Picnic areas designed to accommodate groups of 25 or more.

4.

Boat ramps.

5.

Off-street parking areas.

6.

Recreational fields, courts, arenas, and associated structures for organized sports and competitions.

7.

Stages and amphitheaters.

8.

Dog parks.

9.

Community gardens in excess of 5,000 square feet.

10.

Structures in excess of 600 square feet in size, or more than 15 feet high.

11.

Outdoor amplified sound systems.

12.

Illuminated athletic fields, courts, and other outdoor recreational facilities intended to be used after sunset.

13.

Camping, unless associated with an approved temporary or seasonal event as provided in Chapter 18.440, Temporary Uses.

14.

Golf courses, including club houses and driving ranges.

15.

Development within a high voltage transmission line right-of-way.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1; Ord. 20-01 §1; Ord. 22-09 §2; Ord. No. 24-05, 4/23/2024)

§ 18.140.050. Development Standards.

Development within the PR zone must comply with the following development standards, except where the applicant has obtained an adjustment as provided in Chapter 18.715, Adjustments.

A.

Minimum lot size. None.

B.

Minimum lot width. None.

C.

Maximum structure height. None, except structures within 100 feet of a residential zone are subject to the maximum height limit for the abutting residential zone.

D.

Minimum structure setbacks. None, except where abutting a residential zone. In such cases structures must be set back a minimum distance of one foot for each foot of building height.

E.

Setbacks from future rights-of-way. For the purpose of measuring setbacks from rights-of-way, the setbacks are measured from the ultimate right-of-way as shown in the Transportation System Plan.

F.

Outdoor recreation facility setbacks. Non-illuminated playgrounds must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from abutting residentially-zoned properties. Illuminated playgrounds and other constructed recreational facilities such as swimming pools, skate parks, basketball courts, soccer fields, and group picnic areas must be set back 50 feet from abutting residentially-zoned properties. Where the outdoor facility abuts a school use, the setback is reduced to zero feet. Outdoor recreation facilities not meeting minimum setbacks provided in this subsection may be considered through conditional use review as provided in Chapter 18.740, Conditional Uses.

G.

Projections not for human habitation. Projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, towers excluding TV dish receivers, aerials, flag poles, and other similar objects not used for human occupancy, are not subject to the building height limitations of this title.

H.

Exceptions to minimum setbacks. The following may project into required setbacks:

1.

Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, canopies, or similar architectural features may extend or project into a required setback not more than three feet provided the setback is not reduced to less than three feet.

2.

Fireplace chimneys may project into a required front, side, or rear setback not more than three feet provided the setback is not reduced to less than three feet.

3.

Unroofed porches, decks, or balconies three feet or less in height may project into a required rear or side setback provided the projection does not reduce the width of any setback to less than three feet. Unroofed porches may project a maximum of three feet into a required front setback.

4.

Unroofed landings and stairs may project into required front or rear setbacks only.

I.

Bathrooms and concessions. Bathrooms and concession stands must be set back a minimum distance of 50 feet from abutting residential zones. Where a bathroom or concession stand abuts a Schools use on a residentially-zoned property, the setback is reduced to zero feet.

J.

Parking. Development must comply with Chapter 18.410, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

K.

Signs. Signs in the PR zone must comply with the regulations applicable to nonresidential land uses in residential zones, as provided in Subsection 18.435.130.A.

L.

Lights and amplified sound systems. Lights and amplified sounds systems must comply with Title 6, Nuisance Violations. In addition, glare sources must be hooded, shielded, or otherwise located to avoid direct or reflected illumination in excess of 0.5 foot candles, as measured at the site boundary or at the furthest boundary of abutting industrially-zoned properties.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1; Ord. 22-10 §2)
