Close
Print
Resize:

City of Tigard, OR

[print date]

Title 18. Development Code

Part 18.00. INTRODUCTION

Chapter 18.30. Definitions

§ 18.30.010. List of Terms.

-A-

A-Frame Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Abandoned Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Abut

Accept

Access

Accessible

Accessory Structure

Accessory Use

Accessory Dwelling Unit - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Addition

Adult Bookstore - See Adult Entertainment-Related Definitions

Adult Entertainment-Related Definitions:

•  Adult Bookstore
•  Adult Motion Picture Theater
•  Specified Anatomical Areas
•  Specified Sexual Activities

Adult Motion Picture Theater - See Adult Entertainment-Related Definitions

Aisle

Allowed Use

Alley - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Alternative Access

Amendment

Amenity

Annexation

Antenna - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Apartments - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Approval Authority

Approved Plan

Arcade

Area - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Area of Special Flood Hazard - See Flood-Related Definitions

Attached - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Awning

Awning Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

-B-

Balloon - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Banner - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Base Flood - See Flood-Related Definitions

Basement Bay

Belt Course

Bench Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Berm

Bike Lane - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Bikeway - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Billboard - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Buildable Area

Building

Building, Primary

Building Height

Building Permit

Business

-C-

Caliper - See Tree-Related Definitions

Carport

Certified Arborist - See Tree-Related Definitions

Change of Use

City

Collocation - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Column

Common Wall

Complex

Conditional Use

Corner Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

Cornice

Council

Covered Parking

Cottage Cluster - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Courtyard Units - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Covered Soil Volume - See Tree-Related Definitions

Cul-de-Sac

Cultural Institution Auxiliary Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Cutout - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

-D-

Dedication

Deed

Demolish

Density

Density Bonus

Density Transfer

Detached - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Development

Development Impact Area - See Tree-Related Definitions

Development Permit

Development Site

Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) - See Tree-Related Definitions

Directional Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Director

Display Surface - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Drainage Way

Dripline - See Tree-Related Definitions

Drive-Through Service

Driveway

Dwelling Unit - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Dwelling Unit-Related Definitions:

•  Accessory Dwelling Unit
•  Apartments
•  Attached
•  Cottage Cluster
•  Courtyard Units
•  Detached
•  Dwelling Unit
•  Manufactured Home
•  Quad
•  Rowhouse
•  Single Detached House
•  Small Form Residential

-E-

Easement

Eaves

Egress

Ecoroof

Electronic Information Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Enlargement

Entrance

Entryway Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Exception

-F-

FAA - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Face

Face of a Building - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Family Day Care

FCC - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Fee in Lieu

Fence, Sight-Obscuring

Final Decision

Findings

Flag Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

Flashing Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Flood or Flooding - See Flood-Related Definitions

Flood-Related Definitions:

•  Area of Special Flood Hazard
•  Base Flood
•  Flood or Flooding
•  Floodway
•  Floodway Fringe
•  Special Flood Hazard Area

Floodway - See Flood-Related Definitions

Floodway Fringe - See Flood-Related Definitions

Floor Area

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

Flush Pitched Roof Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Food Cart

Food Cart Pod

Freestanding Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Freeway Interchange - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Freeway-Oriented Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Frontage

Front Lot Line - See Lot-Related Definitions

-G-

Garage

Garage Setback

Glare

Guyed Tower - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

-H-

Hazard Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Hazard Tree Abatement - See Tree-Related Definitions

Hazard Tree Owner or Responsible Party - See Tree-Related Definitions

Heritage Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Home Occupation

Homeowners Association

Household

-I-

Immediate or Serious Danger - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Impact Analysis

Impervious Surface

Improvement

Industrial Park - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Ingress

Intensification

Interior Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

-L-

Land Form Alteration

Landscape Architect

Landscaping

Lattice Tower - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Lawn Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Legal Entity

Legislative

Lighting Methods - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Loading Area - See Loading Space

Loading Space

Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Area - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Averaging - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Consolidation - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Coverage - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Depth - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Line - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot Line Adjustment - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot of Record - See Lot-Related Definitions

Lot-Related Definitions:

•  Corner Lot
•  Flag Lot
•  Front Lot Line
•  Interior Lot
•  Lot
•  Lot Area
•  Lot Averaging
•  Lot Consolidation
•  Lot Coverage
•  Lot Depth
•  Lot Line
•  Lot Line Adjustment
•  Lot of Record
•  Lot Width
•  Rear Lot Line
•  Side Lot Line
•  Street Side Lot Line
•  Sublot Plat
•  Tax Lot
•  Through Lot
•  Tract
•  Unit of Land
•  Zero Lot Line

Lot Width - See Lot-Related Definitions

-M-

Maintenance - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Manufactured Home - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Marijuana

Marijuana Facility

Marquee

Median Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Mitigation

Mixed-Use Building

Mixed-Use Development

Mobile Home

Mobile Home Park

Monopole - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Moving Sign - See Rotating Sign

-N-

Noise

Nonconforming Circumstance

Nonconforming Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Nonresidential Development

Nonresidential Use

Non-Structural Trim - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Non-Tower - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Nuisance Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

-O-

Occupancy Permit

Off-Site Impact

Off-Site Improvement

Open Grown Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Open Soil Volume - See Tree-Related Definitions

Outdoor Storage

Owner

-P-

Painted Wall Decorations - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Painted Wall Highlights - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Painted Wall Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Parapet

Park

Parking Lot

Parking Lot Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Parking Space

Parking Structure

Partition

Party

Path - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Perimeter

Person

Pilaster

Planning Commission

Plat

Premises - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Primary Use

Projecting Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Provider - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Public Infrastructure - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Public Support Facilities

-Q-

Quad - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Quasi-Judicial

-R-

Reader-Board Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Rear Lot Line - See Lot-Related Definitions

Recreational Vehicles

Remodel

Reserve Strip

Residence

Revolving Sign - See Rotating Sign

Right-of-Way - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Road - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Roof

Roof Line - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Roof Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Rotating Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Rowhouse - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

-S-

Setback

Shopping Center - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Shopping Plaza - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Side Lot Line - See Lot-Related Definitions

Sidewalk - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Sign Projection - See Chapter 18.435, Sign

Sign Structure - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Significant Tree Grove - See Tree-Related Definitions

Single Detached House - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Site

Slope

Small Cell - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Special Flood Hazard Area - See Flood-Related Definitions

Specified Anatomical Areas - See Adult Entertainment-Related Definitions

Specified Sexual Activities - See Adult Entertainment-Related Definitions

Square Footage

Stand (of Trees) - See Tree-Related Definitions

Stand Grown Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Story

Street - See Transportation- Related Definitions

Street Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Structural Alteration - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Structure

Subdivision

Substantial Improvement

-T-

Tax Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

Temporary Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Temporary Use

Through Lot - See Lot-Related Definitions

Tigard-Based Nonprofit Organization

Tiny House - See Dwelling-Related Definitions

Tower - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Traffic Flow Plan

Tract - See Lot-Related Definitions

Trail - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Transom

Transportation-Related Definitions:

•  Active Transportation Facility
•  Active Transportation Network
•  Alley
•  Bike Lane
•  Bikeway
•  Path
•  Right-of-Way
•  Road
•  Sidewalk
•  Street
•  Trail

Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Canopy - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Canopy Cover, Effective - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Care Industry Standards - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree-Related Definitions:

•  Caliper
•  Certified Arborist
•  Covered Soil Volume
•  Development Impact Area
•  Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)
•  Dripline
•  Hazard Tree
•  Hazard Tree Abatement
•  Hazard Tree Owner or Responsible Party
•  Heritage Tree
•  Median Tree
•  Nuisance Tree
•  Open Grown Tree
•  Open Soil Volume
•  Parking Lot Tree
•  Significant Tree Grove
•  Stand (of Trees)
•  Stand Grown Tree
•  Street Tree

Tower - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Traffic Flow Plan

Tract - See Lot-Related Definitions

Trail - See Transportation-Related Definitions

Transom

Transportation-Related Definitions:

•  Alley
•  Bike Lane
•  Bikeway
•  Path
•  Right-of-Way
•  Road
•  Sidewalk
•  Street
•  Trail

Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Canopy - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Canopy Cover, Effective - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Care Industry Standards - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree-Related Definitions:

•  Caliper
•  Certified Arborist
•  Covered Soil Volume
•  Development Impact Area
•  Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)
•  Dripline
•  Hazard Tree
•  Hazard Tree Abatement
•  Hazard Tree Owner or Responsible Party
•  Heritage Tree
•  Median Tree
•  Nuisance Tree
•  Open Grown Tree
•  Open Soil Volume
•  Parking Lot Tree
•  Significant Tree Grove
•  Stand (of Trees)
•  Stand Grown Tree
•  Street Tree
•  Tree
•  Tree Canopy
•  Tree Canopy Cover, Effective
•  Tree Care Industry Standards
•  Tree Removal
•  Tree Risk Assessor
•  Understory Tree

Tree Removal - See Tree-Related Definitions

Tree Risk Assessor - See Tree-Related Definitions

Turret

-U-

Understory Tree - See Tree-Related Definitions

Use

-V-

Visible Transmittance

Vision Clearance Area

Visual Obstruction

-W-

Wall Sign - See Chapter 18.435, Signs

Wetlands

Window

Wireless Communication Facility - See Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions

Wireless Communication Facility-Related Definitions:

•  Antenna
•  Collocation
•  FAA
•  FCC
•  Guyed tower
•  Lattice tower
•  Monopole
•  Non-tower
•  Provider
•  Public Infrastructure
•  Small Cell
•  Tower
•  Wireless Communication Facility

-Z-

Zero Lot Line - See Lot-Related Definitions

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1; Ord. 20-01 §1; Ord. 22-06 §2; Ord. 22-10 §2; Ord. 23-09, 12/12/2023; Ord. No. 24-05, 4/23/2024)

§ 18.30.020. Definitions.

As used in this title and corresponding administrative rules, terms, and phrases are defined as provided in this section. For additional definitions, see Chapter 18.60, Use Categories; Chapter 18.435, Signs; and Chapter 18.510, Sensitive Lands.

A.

"A" definitions.

"Abut" -
Joined by a common boundary line or point. Synonymous with adjacent, adjoining, and contiguous.

"Accept" -
To receive as complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements.

"Access" -
The place, means, or way by which pedestrians, bicycles, and vehicles enter or leave property. A private access is an access not in public ownership and is controlled by means of deed, dedication, or easement.

"Accessible" -
Designed in a manner to ensure access for persons with disabilities, in accordance with all state and federal regulations.

"Accessory structure" -
A structure whose use is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of property, is located on the same lot as the primary use, and is freestanding or is joined to the primary structure solely by non-habitable space as defined by the state building code.

"Accessory use" -
Uses or activities that are a subordinate part of and clearly incidental to a primary use on site. Developments may have more than one accessory use.

"Addition" -
A modification to an existing building or structure that increases its height, square footage, or lot coverage. A structure is considered an addition only when it shares a common wall and is structurally dependent on the primary structure. See also "accessory structure" and "common wall."

Adult entertainment-related definitions:

a.
"Adult bookstore" -
An establishment characterized by merchandise, items, books, magazines, other publications, films, or videotapes that are for sale, rent, or viewing on the premises and are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting the specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas defined in this section..

b.
"Adult motion picture theater" -
An establishment used primarily for the presentation of motion pictures or videotapes having as dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas defined in this section.

c.
"Specified anatomical areas" -
Uncovered or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, post-pubertal human female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

d.
"Specified sexual activities" -
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, flagellation, torture or bondage either real or simulated.

"Aisle" -
The corridor by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.

"Allowed use" -
Any use allowed in a base zone and subject to the development standards of that base zone.

"Alternative access" -
The ability to enter a highway or other public street indirectly through another improved roadway rather than direct driveway entrance from the public right-of-way frontage.

"Amendment" -
A change in the wording, context, or substance of this title or the comprehensive plan, or a change in the boundaries of a base zone or overlay zone on the official zoning map or the boundaries of a designation on the comprehensive plan map.

"Amenity" -
A natural or created feature that enhances the aesthetic and functional quality, visual appeal, or makes more attractive or satisfying a particular property, place, or area.

"Annexation" -
The incorporation of a land area into the City of Tigard with a resulting change in the boundaries of the city.

"Antenna" -
A device used to transmit or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between land- or satellite-based structures.

"Approval authority" -
Either the Director, the initial hearing body, or the council, depending on the context in which the term is used.

"Approved plan" -
A plan that has been granted final approval by the appropriate approval authority.

"Arcade" -
An exterior covered passageway along a building facade that is open to the street frontage.

"Awning" -
A covered area extending from the wall of a building, usually extending above a sidewalk providing shelter or sunshade.

B.

"B" definitions.

"Basement" -
Any floor level below the first story in a building that does not meet the definition of a story.

"Bay" -
(a) Within a structure, a regularly repeated spatial element defined by beams or ribs and their supports; (b) a protruded structure with a bay window.

"Belt course" -
A horizontal band or molding set in the face of a building as a design element (also called a string course).

"Berm" -
A mound of earth with sloping sides that is located between areas of approximately the same elevation, for the purpose of screening for views or sound, providing wind protection, or to provide an elevated planting area.

"Buildable area" -
The area of a lot exclusive of the areas required for front, side, and rear setbacks and other required open spaces and that is available for siting and constructing a building or structure.

"Building" -
A structure that includes a roof and is intended to provide for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

"Building, primary" -
A building in which the primary use of a property is conducted.

"Building height" -
The exterior vertical measurement of a building. See Section 18.40.040.

"Building permit" -
Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. Also see "development permit."

"Business" -
All of the activities carried on by the same legal entity on the same premises and includes charitable, fraternal, religious, educational, or social organizations.

C.

"C" definitions.

"Carport" -
A single-story building, or portion thereof, that contains one or more parking spaces for the storage of vehicles or bicycles. A carport does not contain parking aisles for internal maneuvering and circulation and may be partially enclosed.

"Change of use" -
Any use that differs from the previous use as provided in Chapter 18.60, Use Categories.

"City" -
The area within the territorial limits of the City of Tigard, Oregon.

"Column" -
In structures, a relatively long, slender structural compression member such as a post, pillar, or strut; usually vertical, supporting a load that acts in (or near) the direction of its longitudinal axis.

"Common wall" -
A wall or joined walls that share a boundary to provide separation of interior spaces.

"Complex" -
A structure or group of structures developed on one or more contiguous units of land and developed as part of an overall development plan.

"Conditional use" -
A use that may be allowed by the approval authority following a public hearing, upon findings by the authority that the approval criteria have been met or will be met upon satisfaction of conditions of approval.

"Cornice" -
Decorative projection or crown along the top of a wall or roof.

"Council" -
The City Council of Tigard, Oregon.

"Covered parking" -
A single-story building that contains multiple parking spaces for the storage of vehicles or bicycles, or a multi-story building that partially or completely covers one or more parking spaces with the horizontal extension of the second story beyond the vertical walls of the first story. A covered parking area may contain parking aisles for internal maneuvering and circulation and may be partially enclosed.

"Cul-de-sac" -
The circular turnaround at the end of a dead-end street.

D.

"D" definitions.

"Dedication" -
The limited grant by a property owner of property for specified purposes by the public.

"Deed" -
A legal document conveying ownership of real property.

"Demolish" -
To raze, destroy, dismantle, deface, or in any other manner cause partial or total ruin of a building or structure.

"Density" -
The intensity of residential land uses, usually stated as the number of dwelling units per acre or as the number of buildable lots per acre, in the case of small form residential development. See Section 18.40.130.

"Density bonus" -
Additional dwelling units or lots that can be earned as an incentive for providing undeveloped open space, landscaping, or tree canopy as defined further in this title.

"Density transfer" -
The transfer of all or part of the required density from one part of a development site to another part.

"Development" -
(1) A building or structure; (2) a mining operation; (3) a material change in the use or appearance of a structure or land; or (4) division of land into two or more units of land, including partitions and subdivisions as provided in Oregon Revised Statutes 92.

"Development permit" -
Any permit, such as building, site work, or construction of public improvements, issued by the city for actions authorized under this title. Land use approval is required prior to the issuance of development permits for some actions.

"Development site" -
A lot or combination of lots upon which one or more buildings or other improvements are constructed.

"Director" -
The Director of Community Development for the City of Tigard, Oregon, or designee.

"Drainage way" -
Undeveloped land inundated during a 25-year storm with a peak flow of at least five cubic feet per second and conveyed, at least in part, by identifiable channels that either drain to the Tualatin River directly or after flowing through other drainage ways, channels, creeks, or special flood hazard area.

"Drive-through service" -
A use or structure that is designed and intended to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during participation in an activity on the site.

"Driveway" -
A private way providing ingress and egress from one or two units of land to a public or private street.

Dwelling unit-related definitions:

a.
"Dwelling unit" -
A structure or portion thereof that is used for human habitation including permanent provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation.

b.
"Accessory dwelling unit" -
An additional dwelling unit on the same lot with a primary dwelling unit or units. For the purposes of this title, attached and internal accessory dwelling units are considered small form residential development and detached accessory dwelling units are considered accessory dwelling units.

c.
"Apartments" -
A type of attached housing that contains at least four dwelling units in any vertical or horizontal arrangement but excluding courtyard units, quads, and rowhouses.

d.
"Attached" -
Connected or joined by a common wall, roof, or ceiling with another dwelling unit. Dwelling units connected only by a breezeway, deck, porch, or other unconditioned or uninhabitable space are considered detached.

e.
"Cottage cluster" -
A group of small detached dwelling units located on a single lot or group of lots where common areas and parking are shared.

f.
"Courtyard units" -
A group of small attached dwelling units located on a single lot or group of lots where common areas and parking are shared.

g.
"Detached" -
Not connected or joined by a common wall, roof, or ceiling with another dwelling unit. Dwelling units connected only by a breezeway, deck, porch, or other unconditioned or uninhabitable space are considered detached.

h.
"Manufactured home" -
A structure that meets all of the following:

i.

Constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and sanitation facilities and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction;

ii.

Permanently anchored to the ground; and

iii.

Complies with the minimum requirements for permanent connection of electrical and plumbing systems.

i.
"Quad" -
A type of attached housing consisting of two dwelling units on a first story, attached at a common sidewall, and two dwelling units on a second story, attached to the first story dwelling units at their common floor and ceiling.

j.
"Rowhouse" -
A type of attached housing that shares a common sidewall with one or more dwelling units, but excluding apartments, courtyard units, and quads. A rowhouse is considered the same as a townhouse within the meaning of state law.

k.
"Single detached house" -
One dwelling unit, freestanding and structurally separated from any other dwelling unit or buildings, but excluding mobile homes, detached accessory dwelling units, and units in cottage cluster developments.

l.
"Small form residential" -
One single detached house or up to three attached dwelling units on the same lot, which as a whole are freestanding and structurally separated from any other buildings. Small form residential includes duplexes, triplexes, and attached and internal accessory dwelling units within the meaning of state law. Small form residential does not include mobile homes, detached accessory dwelling units, or dwelling units in cottage cluster, courtyard unit, quad, or rowhouse developments.

E.

"E" definitions.

"Easement" -
A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.

"Eaves" -
The lower edge of a sloping roof; that part of a roof of a building or structure that projects beyond the wall.

"Ecoroof" -
A thin vegetated roof system, sometimes designed to manage stormwater, built with the following layers starting at the bottom: waterproof membrane, drainage material, a lightweight layer of soil, and a cover of plants.

"Egress" -
An exit.

"Enlargement" -
Any physical expansion of an existing structure, construction of a new structure, or purchase or lease of an existing structure on the same site or an adjacent lot. Enlargement also includes any increase to the size of the site through processes such as the purchase or lease of adjacent lots, lot line adjustments, or lot consolidations. Enlargement may or may not result in intensification of the use. Also see "intensification."

"Entrance" -
The space comprising a door and any flanking or transom windows associated with a building or structure.

"Exception" -
Permission to depart from a specific design or development standard in the Community Development Code of the City of Tigard.

F.

"F" definitions.

"Face" -
To front upon.

"Family day care" -
A facility authorized under ORS 329A to provide child care, often referred to as "Registered Family Child Care Homes" or "Certified Family Child Care Homes".

"Fee in lieu" -
Payments in cash as an alternative to a dedication of land or construction of improvements required as a condition of a land use approval.

"Fence, sight-obscuring" -
A barrier consisting of wood, metal, masonry, or similar materials, which obstructs vision.

"Final decision" -
A determination reduced to writing, signed, and filed by the appropriate approval authority.

"Findings" -
A written statement of the facts determined to be relevant by the approval authority as the basis for making its decision. The approval authority applies the relevant facts to the approval criteria or standards in order to reach its decision.

Flood-related definitions:

a.
"Area of special flood hazard" -
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, or AR. "Special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning and definition with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."

b.
"Base flood" -
A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

c.
"Flood" or "flooding" -
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

i.

The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

ii.

The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

iii.

Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection c.ii of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

d.
"Floodway" -
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

e.
"Floodway fringe" -
The area of the special flood hazard area lying outside of the floodway.

f.
"Special flood hazard area" -
See "Area of special flood hazard" above, for this definition.

"Floor area" -
The gross horizontal area, under a roof, of all floors of a building or structure. See Section 18.40.100.

"Floor area ratio (FAR)" -
The floor area of all buildings and structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. See Section 18.40.110.

"Food cart" -
A mobile vehicle, from which food or beverages are served to walk-up customers, that is designed and licensed to be driven under its own power or pulled by another vehicle. A food cart may occupy the same property for an indefinite period of time through an approved food cart permit. An approved food cart is not considered a building as long as its wheels remain attached and operational and it meets the definition of a vehicle under ORS.

"Food cart pod" -
A food cart pod is a standalone use that consists of four or more food carts and associated amenities on the same site.

"Food truck" -
A mobile vehicle, from which food or beverages are served to walk-up customers, that is designed an licensed to be drive under its own power or pulled by another vehicle. A food truck does not occupy the same property for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period, or more than seven days in any one-month period.

"Frontage" -
That portion of a development site that abuts a public or private street.

G.

"G" definitions.

"Garage" -
A fully-enclosed building, or portion thereof, that contains one or more parking spaces for the storage of vehicles or bicycles. A garage does not contain any parking aisles for internal maneuvering or circulation.

"Garage setback" -
The horizontal distance from a property line or public access easement to the nearest portion of a garage door or carport entrance designed for vehicle access, whichever is shorter. For purposes of measurement, a carport entrance is the vertical plane between the ground and the outermost edge of the roof.

"Glare" -
The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.

H.

"H" definitions.

"Home occupation" -
A business located in or on the same lot as a dwelling unit and operated by a resident of that dwelling unit.

"Homeowners association" -
An association operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner of a planned development, condominium development, subdivision, or other described land area is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a common property.

"Household" -
A group of related or unrelated individuals living together in a dwelling unit.

I.

"I" definitions.

"Impact analysis" -
A study to determine the potential direct or indirect effects of a proposed development on activities, utilities, circulation, surrounding land uses, community facilities, environment, and other factors.

"Impervious surface" -
Any material that prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground.

"Improvement" -
Any permanent structure that becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to property.

"Ingress" -
Access or entry.

"Intensification" -
Any operational expansion of an existing use that has more than minimal impacts on surrounding properties, sensitive lands, or public facilities. Intensification may or may not include physical enlargement. Also see "enlargement."

J.

"J" definitions.

[Reserved]

K.

"K" definitions.

[Reserved]

L.

"L" definitions.

"Land form alteration" -
Any human-actuated change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the addition of buildings or other structures, mining, quarrying, dredging, filling, grading, earthwork construction, stockpiling of rock, sand, dirt or gravel or other earth material, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.

"Landscape architect" -
An individual registered with the Oregon State Landscape Architect Board as a registered landscape architect.

"Landscaping" -
Areas primarily devoted to plants, including trees, shrubs, and groundcover, with or without other natural or artificial landscaping elements such as ponds, fountains, lighting, benches, bridges, rocks, paths, sculptures, trellises, or screens.

"Legal entity" -
Includes, but is not limited to, individual proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, nonprofit corporations, associations, or joint stock companies.

"Legislative" -
A land use decision that applies to a large number of individuals or properties.

"Loading space" or "loading area" -
An off-street space on the same lot with a building, structure, or use, or contiguous to a group of buildings, structures, or uses, for the temporary parking of a vehicle that is loading or unloading persons, merchandise, or materials, and which space or berth abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access and egress.

Lot-related definitions:

a.
"Unit of land" -
An area of land that is described by a survey or other legal description, and that is lawfully established as discrete and transferable. A unit of land created solely to establish a separate tax account is not considered lawfully established.

b.
"Lot" -
A legally defined unit of land, other than a tract, that is the result of a land division. This definition is inclusive of the definitions of both lot (the result of subdividing) and parcel (the result of partitioning) provided by ORS 92.

c.
"Corner lot" -
A unit of land situated at the intersection of two streets where the interior angle of such intersection does not exceed 135º.

d.
"Flag lot" -
A lot with 25 feet or less of frontage and two distinct parts: the flag, which is the only area to accommodate a structure and is located behind a frontage lot; and the pole, which connects the flag to the street and provides the only street frontage for the lot. A flag lot may only be created through a lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or partition process.

e.
"Front lot line" -
In the case of an interior lot, a property line that abuts the street; in the case of a corner lot, the shortest of the two property lines that abut the street, except a property owner may choose which property line to identify as the front lot line where both street property lines are 75 feet or more in length; or in the case of a through lot, the property line that abuts the street with the lowest classification.

f.
"Interior lot" -
A unit of land other than a corner lot and having frontage on only one street.

g.
"Lot area" -
The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a unit of land.

h.
"Lot averaging" -
A technique that allows one or more lots in a subdivision to be undersized provided that the average lot size of all lots in the subdivision is not less than that required for the proposed housing types.

i.
"Lot consolidation" -
The elimination of a common lot line between two or more units of land to form one lot.

j.
"Lot coverage" -
The percentage of lot area covered by the horizontal projection of all structures, buildings, and other impervious surfaces.

k.
"Lot depth" -
The distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.

l.
"Lot line" -
The property line bounding a unit of land.

m.
"Lot line adjustment" -
The relocation of recorded lot lines that does not result in the creation of an additional unit of land.

n.
"Lot of record" -
A unit of land that was not created through an approved subdivision or partition process, and additionally meets one of the following:

i.

Created by a deed or other instrument and recorded with Washington County or another appropriate recording agency prior to July 22, 1968; or

ii.

Annexed to the City of Tigard after July 22, 1968 and meets the criteria for a lot of record under the development code of Washington County.

o.
"Lot width" -
For lots with straight front lot lines, lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured at the minimum front setback point along each side lot line. For lots with curved front lot lines, lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured at the minimum front setback point perpendicular from the midpoint of the front lot line. See Section 18.40.060 and Subsection 18.40.080.B.

p.
"Rear lot line" -
The recorded lot line or lines most distant from and generally opposite the front lot line, except that in the case of an interior triangular lot or lot with more than four sides, it means a straight line ten feet in length which is parallel to the front lot line or its chord and intersects the other lot lines at points most distant from the lot line.

q.
"Side lot line" -
Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

r.
"Street side lot line" -
A side lot line that abuts a street.

s.
"Sublot" -
A unit of land resulting from a sublot plat. A sublot is not considered a lot and is created solely for platting and property transfer purposes. Each sublot is considered part of the lot from which it was created and is not further divisible. Each sublot must contain only one dwelling unit.

t.
"Tax lot" -
Lot designation created by the county assessor for the purpose of levying property taxes. A unit of land created solely to establish a separate tax account is not considered lawfully established for development purposes.

u.
"Through lot" -
A unit of land that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the unit of land.

v.
"Tract" -
A unit of land created and designated through a land division process for a specific purpose, including, but not limited to: stormwater management, creation of a private street or alley, tree preservation, protection of environmental resources, or provision of open space. A tract is not a lot, a lot of record, or a public right-of-way.

w.
"Zero lot line" -
The location of a building or structure on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line.

M.

"M" definitions.

"Marijuana" -
All parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted there from), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination.

"Marijuana facility" -
A commercial or public use or structure where marijuana is produced, processed, distributed, transferred, sold, or consumed.

"Marquee" -
A permanent roof-like shelter over an entrance to a building or structure.

"Mitigation" -
Methods used to alleviate or lessen the impact of development.

"Mixed-use building" -
See "mixed-use development."

"Mixed-use development" -
A multi-story building with a residential use on the upper stories and civic, commercial, or industrial uses on at least the first story.

"Mobile home" -
A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

"Mobile home park" -
Any place where four or more mobile homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.

N.

"N" definitions.

"Noise" -
Any undesired audible sound.

"Nonconforming circumstance" -
A use, activity, lot, or development that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Community Development Code of the City of Tigard but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the applicable base zone.

"Nonresidential development" -
A development that contains a civic, commercial, or industrial use and no residential uses. Also see "mixed-use development."

"Nonresidential use" -
A civic, commercial, or industrial use as provided in Chapter 18.60.

O.

"O" definitions.

"Occupancy permit" -
A required permit allowing the use of a building or structure after it has been determined that all the requirements of applicable ordinances have been met.

"Off-site impact" -
A condition that creates, imposes, aggravates, or leads to inadequate, impractical, unsafe, or unhealthy conditions on a site proposed for development or on off-site property or facilities.

"Off-site improvement" -
Improvements required to be made off-site as a result of an application for development and including, but not limited to, road widening and upgrading, stormwater facilities, and traffic improvements.

"Outdoor storage" -
The keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours when not completely enclosed within a building or structure.

"Owner" -
Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having legal or equitable interest in the property.

P.

"P" definitions.

"Parapet" -
A low, solid, protective screening or decorative wall as an extension of exterior building walls beyond the roof or deck level.

"Park" -
Any unit of land set apart and devoted to the purposes of pleasure, recreation, ornament, light, and air for the general public.

"Parking lot" -
An uncovered paved area that includes multiple parking spaces and parking aisles for internal maneuvering and circulation.

"Parking space" -
A clearly defined area used to store a single vehicle or bicycle that meets the minimum standards of this title.

"Parking structure" -
A single- or multi-story building, or portion thereof, that contains multiple parking spaces for the storage of vehicles or bicycles. A parking structure contains parking aisles for internal maneuvering and circulation.

"Partition" -
Division of a unit of land into two or three lots within a calendar year when such area of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under common ownership. Partitioning land does not include:

a.

Divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures, foreclosures of recorded contracts for the sale of real property, or creation of cemetery lots;

b.

Any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional lot is not created and where the existing lot, reduced in size by the adjustment, is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by an applicable zoning ordinance; or

c.

The sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or property by single owner.

"Party" -
A person who makes an appearance in a proceeding through the submission of either written or verbal evidence.

"Perimeter" -
The boundaries or borders of a unit of land.

"Person" -
An individual, corporation, governmental agency, official advisory committee of the city, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, or two or more people having a joint or common interest or any other legal entity.

"Pilaster" -
An ornamental or functional column or pillar incorporated into a wall.

"Planning Commission" -
The Planning Commission of the City of Tigard, Oregon.

"Plat" -
A final map, diagram, or other writing containing all the descriptions, specifications, and provisions concerning a land division.

"Primary use" -
A primary use is the activity, or combination of activities of chief importance on the site, and the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. Development may have more than one primary use.

"Public support facilities" -
Services that are necessary to support uses allowed in the base zone and involve only minor structures such as underground utilities and construction of improvements including sidewalks, curbs, streetlights, and driveway aprons, power lines and poles, phone booths, fire hydrants, as well as bus stops, benches, and mailboxes that are necessary to support principal development.

Q.

"Q" definitions.

"Quasi-judicial" -
Action that involves the application of adopted policy to a specific land use application or amendments.

R.

"R" definitions.

"Recreational vehicles" -
A vacation trailer or other unit, with or without motor power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreation or emergency purposes. The unit must be identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

"Regulated affordable housing" -
Housing units that are made affordable through public subsidies or statutory regulations that restrict or limit resident income levels, rents, or mortgages, including any ancillary fees. Regulated affordable housing must:

a.

Be subject to a local, state, or federal compliance agreement or contract with a minimum term of at least 20 years; and

b.

Be affordable to households at or below 80% median family income as defined annually by Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Portland-Vancouver Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).

"Remodel" -
An internal or external modification to an existing building or structure that does not increase the lot coverage.

"Reserve strip" -
A strip of property usually one foot in width overlaying a dedicated street that is reserved to the city for control of access until such time as additional right-of-way is accepted by the city for continuation or widening of the street.

"Residence" -
See "Dwelling unit."

"Roof" -
The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a building or structure.

S.

"S" definitions.

"Setback"
(front, rear, side, and street side) - The horizontal distance from a property line to the nearest vertical wall of a structure. Also see "garage setback."

"Site" -
Any unit of land or combination of contiguous units of land.

"Slope" -
The deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.

"Square footage" -
For lot square footage, see "gross lot area." For building square footage, see "floor area."

"Story"
– See Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

"Structure" -
Any object that is built or constructed, and located in or on the ground, or that is attached to something fixed to the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials.

"Subdivision" -
Division of a unit of land into four or more units of land within a calendar year when such unit of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a common ownership. The term "subdivision" also applies to an area of land that has been subdivided.

"Substantial improvement" -
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

a.

Before the improvement or repair is started; or

b.

If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

i.

Any development for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or

ii.

Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

T.

"T" definitions.

"Temporary use" -
A use of land, a building, or a structure that is short-term or seasonal in nature and does not make permanent changes to a site.

"Tigard-based nonprofit organization" -
An organization that is located in the city and has nonprofit status as defined by the state of Oregon and raises funds that are used by the organization.

"Traffic Flow Plan" -
A plan submitted with a proposal for skinny streets that shows the potential queuing pattern that will allow for safe and efficient travel of emergency vehicles, service vehicles and passenger vehicles with minimal disturbance. This may include a combination of strategic driveway locations, turnouts or other mechanisms that will foster safe and efficient travel.

"Transom" -
A horizontal glass plane, typically encased in a wood or metal frame that separates the storefront from the upper facade.

Transportation-related definitions:

a.

"Active transportation facility" - A transportation facility that is designed to accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists, or transit users and not located within or across a typical street cross section, such as a sidewalk, bicycle lane, or crosswalk. Typical active transportation facilities include public sidewalks, trails, paths, and other related improvements such as transit stations, mid-block street crossings, enhanced street crossings, and end-of-trip accessory facilities such as bicycle parking.

b.

"Active transportation network" - A series of connected active transportation facilities for travel to, from, and within the city and large development sites. The active transportation network is inclusive of established transit routes since most transit users start and end their trips as pedestrians.

c.

"Alley" - A minor way that is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

d.

"Bike lane" - Lanes on an improved street that are designated for use by bicyclists and separated from vehicular traffic either by striping or small concrete barrier.

e.

"Bikeway" - A path, paved and separated from streets and sidewalks, designed to be used by cyclists.

f.

"Path" - A paved off-street transportation facility for pedestrians and bicyclists that provides connections within, through, or between developments within a single block or for short distances.

g.

"Right-of-way" - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, pedestrian and bike paths, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, street trees or other special use. The usage of the term right-of-way for land division purposes means that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a plat or map is to be separate and distinct from the lots adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots.

h.

"Road" - See "Street."

i.

"Sidewalk" - A paved on-street transportation facility for pedestrians.

j.

"Street" - A public or private accessway that is created to provide ingress or egress for vehicles to three or more lots, excluding a private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to such land in conjunction with the use of such land for forestry, mining, or agricultural purposes. Interstate 5 and Highway 217 are not considered streets. Also see "right-of-way."

k.

"Trail" - A paved off-street transportation facility for pedestrians and bicyclists that spans multiple developments, lots, or blocks. They are often located next to other linear corridors such as streams, highways, or rail lines and allow users to travel greater distances than paths.

Tree-related definitions:

a.
"Caliper" -
The tree care industry standard for measuring the trunk diameter of nursery stock. Caliper is the average diameter of the trunk of a nursery tree measured six inches above the ground for trunks less than or equal to an average of four inches in diameter (when measured six inches above ground). When the trunk of a nursery tree is greater than an average of four inches in diameter (when measured six inches above ground), caliper is the average diameter at 12 inches above ground (See Figure 18.30.1).

Figure 18.30.1 Caliper

b.
"Certified arborist" -
An individual certified by the International Society of Arboriculture as a certified arborist.

c.
"Covered soil volume" -
A volume of soil that is under pavement and specially designed to support the growth of a tree. Covered soil volumes contain existing, new, or amended soil with the physical, chemical, and biological properties necessary to support the growth of a tree, while at the same time supporting the load-bearing requirements and engineering standards of the overlying pavement. Covered soil volumes would not be considered tree growth limiting by a project arborist or landscape architect in an urban forestry plan developed per the standards in Chapter 18.420, Landscaping and Screening and the Urban Forestry Manual.

d.
"Development impact area" -
The area on a site or right-of-way associated with a site affected by any and all site or right-of-way improvements, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, walls, parking and loading areas, street improvements, paved and graveled areas, utilities, irrigation, equipment storage, construction parking and landscaping. The impact area also refers to areas of grading, filling, stockpiling, demolition, tree removal, trenching, boring and any other activities that require excavation or soil disturbance.

e.
"Diameter at Breast Height (DBH)" -
The average diameter of the trunk of a tree measured 4.5 feet above mean ground level at the base of the trunk. If the tree splits into multiple trunks above ground, but below 4.5 feet, the DBH is the average diameter of the narrowest point beneath the split. If the tree has excessive swelling at 4.5 feet, the DBH is the average diameter of the narrowest point beneath the swelling. If the tree splits into multiple trunks at or directly below ground, it is considered one tree and the DBH is the square root of the sum of the cross-sectional area of each trunk at 4.5 feet above mean ground level multiplied by 1.1284.

f.
"Dripline" -
The outer limit of a tree canopy projected to the ground.

g.
"Hazard tree" -
Any tree or tree part that has been or could be determined by an independent tree risk assessor to constitute a high level hazard requiring hazard tree abatement with an overall minimum risk rating of 8 for trees or tree parts up to four-inch DBH, 9 for trees or tree parts greater than four-inch and up to 20-inch DBH, or 10 for trees or tree parts greater than 20-inch DBH using the tree risk assessment methodology in Appendix 1 of the Urban Forestry Manual.

h.
"Hazard tree abatement" -
The process of reducing or eliminating a hazard to an overall risk rating of less than 8 for trees or tree parts up to four-inch DBH, 9 for trees or tree parts greater than four-inch and up to 20-inch DBH, or 10 for trees or tree parts greater than 20-inch DBH using the tree risk assessment methodology in Appendix 1 of the Urban Forestry Manual through pruning, tree removal, or other means in a manner that complies with all applicable rules and regulations.

i.
"Hazard tree owner or responsible party" -
The property owner or responsible party with the largest percentage of a hazard tree trunk immediately above the trunk flare or root buttresses. In cases where the hazard tree consists of a branch instead of an entire tree, the hazard tree owner or responsible party is the person who owns or is responsible for the property from where the branch originates.

j.
"Heritage tree" -
Any tree or stand of trees of landmark importance due to age, size, species, horticultural quality, or historic importance that has been approved as a heritage tree by the Tigard City Council.

k.
"Median tree" -
Any tree within the public right-of-way under City of Tigard jurisdiction between opposing lanes of vehicular traffic. Trees in the centers of cul-de-sacs and roundabouts within the public right-of-way under City of Tigard jurisdiction are considered median trees.

l.
"Nuisance tree" -
Any tree included on the Nuisance Tree List in the Urban Forestry Manual.

m.
"Open grown tree" -
Any tree that has grown and established in an isolated manner without significant competition for light, space, and nutrients from other trees. Open grown trees generally retain more foliage, develop greater trunk tapers, have more extensive root systems, and are more resistant to windthrow than stand grown trees.

n.
"Open soil volume" -
An unpaved volume of soil, which contains existing, new, or amended soil with the physical, chemical and biological properties necessary to support the growth of a tree.

o.
"Parking lot tree" -
Any tree used to meet minimum parking lot landscaping requirements.

p.
"Significant tree grove" -
A stand of trees that has been identified as significant through the Statewide Land Use Planning Goal 5 process and mapped on the "City of Tigard Significant Tree Grove Map."

q.
"Stand (of trees)" -
A distinct area of stand grown trees, often predominantly native and with contiguous canopies, which form a visual or biological unit.

r.
"Stand grown tree" -
Any tree that has grown and established in close association with other trees and, as a result, has experienced significant competition for light, space, and nutrients from other trees. Stand grown trees generally retain less foliage, develop less trunk taper, have less extensive root systems, and are less resistant to windthrow than open grown trees.

s.
"Street tree" -
Any tree equal to or greater than 1.5 inch caliper or DBH within a public right-of-way under City of Tigard jurisdiction or easement for public access under City of Tigard jurisdiction, or any tree equal to or greater than 1.5 inch caliper or DBH outside of a public right-of-way or easement for public access that the city can demonstrate was planted or preserved as a street tree to meet the requirements for a city permit or project. Median trees are not considered street trees.

t.
"Tree" -
A woody perennial plant, often with one dominant trunk, the capacity to achieve a mature height greater than 16 feet, and primarily referred to as a tree in scientific literature.

u.
"Tree canopy" -
The area above ground that is covered by the trunk, branches, and foliage of a tree or group of trees' crowns.

v.
"Tree canopy cover, effective" -
A formula detailed in Chapter 18.420, Landscaping and Screening and the Urban Forestry Manual used to calculate the amount of tree canopy that will be provided for a given unit of land through any combination of preserving existing trees and planting new trees. In general, the formula grants bonus tree canopy credit based on the existing tree canopy of trees that are preserved, and grants additional tree canopy credit based on the projected mature tree canopy of newly planted trees.

w.
"Tree care industry standards" -
Generally accepted industry standards for tree care practices detailed in the most current version of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations. In addition, tree care industry standards includes adherence to all applicable rules and regulations for the completion of any tree care operation.

x.
"Tree removal" -
The cutting or removing of 50 percent or more of a crown, trunk, or root system of a tree, or any action that results in the loss of aesthetic or physiological viability or causes the tree to fall or be in immediate danger of falling.

y.
"Tree risk assessor" -
An individual deemed qualified by the International Society of Arboriculture to conduct tree risk assessments.

z.
"Understory tree" -
Any tree that is adapted to grow and complete its lifecycle within the shade and beneath the canopy of another tree.

"Turret" -
A very small and slender tower attached to a larger building.

U.

"U" definitions.

"Use" -
The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

V.

"V" definitions.

"Visible transmittance" -
A measure of the amount of visible light transmitted through a material (typically glass). Information about visible transmittance typically is, or can be, provided by window manufacturers.

"Vision clearance area" -
A triangular area located at the intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad, or a street and a driveway; defined by a line across the corners, the ends of which are on the street or alley lines, an equal and specified distance from the corner.

"Visual obstruction" -
Any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, device, wall, or structure between the elevations of three feet and eight feet above the adjacent curb height or above the elevation of gutter line of street edge where there is no curb, as determined by the Public Works Director or City Engineer, and so located at a street, drive, or alley intersection as to limit the visibility of pedestrians or persons in motor vehicles on said streets, drives, or alleys.

W.

"W" definitions.

"Wetlands" -
Land often called swamp, marsh, or bog that exhibits all of the following characteristics:

a.

The land supports hydrophytic vegetation. This occurs when more than 50 percent of the dominant species from all strata are classified as wetland species;

b.

The land has hydric soils. Hydric soils are soils that are saturated, flooded, or in ponds long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil profile; and

c.

The land has wetland hydrology. Wetland hydrology is permanent or periodic inundation, or soil saturation for a significant period (at least one week) during the growing season.

The city will use the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" as the basis for determining where wetlands are located. An area of privately owned land that otherwise satisfies the definition of a wetland is not defined as a wetland if it was created by human activity after October 11, 1984, as part of an approved development. This exclusion does not apply to wetland migration areas.

"Window" -
Any opening constructed in a wall to admit light or air, framed and spanned with glass.

Wireless communication facility-related definitions:

a.
"Antenna" -
A device commonly in the form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radiation. An antenna is typically mounted on a supporting tower, pole, mast, or building.

b.
"Collocation" -
The mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building, or structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes, whether or not there is an existing antenna on the structure.

c.
"FAA" -
The Federal Aviation Administration.

d.
"FCC" -
The Federal Communications Commission.

e.
"Non-tower" -
Any existing structure such as a building, mechanical equipment, water tank, utility pole, or light pole, to which wireless communication equipment is attached, but which does not have the primary purpose of supporting such equipment.

f.
"Provider" -
A person or company in business of designing, installing, marketing and servicing wireless communication services including cellular telephone, personal communications services (PCS), enhanced/specialized mobile telephones, and commercial paging services.

g.
"Public infrastructure" -
structures in the public right-of-way that are in public ownership or are supportive of public or private utilities.

h.
"Small cell" -
A low-power wireless communication facility used to increase capacity to wireless communication demand areas or provide infill coverage in areas of weak reception, including a separate transmitting and receiving station serving the facility. Small cell wireless facilities must:

i.

Be mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height, including all antennas;

ii.

Not include any antenna more than three cubic feet in volume; and

iii.

Include no more than 28 cubic feet of accessory equipment, including pre-existing associated equipment.

i.
"Tower" -
A new structure, tower, pole, or mast erected to support wireless communication antennas and connecting appurtenances. Support structure types include:

i.
"Guyed tower" -
A tower that is supported by the use of cables (guy wires) that are permanently anchored;

ii.
"Lattice tower" -
A tower characterized by an open framework of lateral cross members that stabilize the tower;

iii.
"Monopole" -
A single upright pole, engineered to be self-supporting and requiring no guy wires or lateral cross-supports.

j.
"Wireless communication facility" -
An unmanned facility for the transmission of radio frequency (RF) signals, usually consisting of an equipment shelter, cabinet, or other enclosed structure containing electronic equipment, a support structure, antennas or other transmission and reception devices.

(Ord. 17-22 §2; Ord. 18-21 §2; Ord. 18-23 §2; Ord. 18-28 §1; Ord. 19-09 §1; Ord. 20-01 §1; Ord. 22-06 §2; Ord. 22-10 §2; Ord. 23-09, 12/12/2023; Ord. No. 24-05, 4/23/2024; Ord. 25-01, 1/28/2025)
