TREE PROTECTION

5.1     Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish processes and standards to preserve Durham’s
prominent and historic tree canopy. Trees contribute to community health, air quality, and
healthy streams. A tree canopy provides habitat for birds and other urban wildlife. Trees also
shade properties and public open spaces, enhancing outdoor activities and maintaining livable
temperatures during the summer season. The Ordinance is intended to promote tree
preservation, replanting and management of the urban forest.

5.2     Scope.
5.2.1   This Chapter 5 shall apply to the proposed removal of trees in connection with Type II,
Type III, limited land use, and expedited land division applications under the Durham
Development Code.

5.2.2   This Chapter does not apply to the following:

5.2.2.1          The removal of plants that do not meet the definition of tree under this Chapter.

5.2.2.2          The removal of trees governed by Durham Municipal Code.

5.2.3   All calculations and measurements taken pursuant to this chapter shall be completed
prior to any land division or lot line adjustment, utilizing the square footage of the parent
property.

5.3     Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this Chapter:

Applicant: The individual person or entity, or persons or entities, applying to remove a tree. If the
trunk of the tree proposed to be removed straddles multiple property lines, an application for the
removal of that tree must be signed by the owner of each property straddled by the tree’s trunk.

Arborist, Project: An arborist who is engaged by an applicant to prepare and implement a Tree
Preservation Plan.

                                                                                                           50 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
Arborist: An individual who has met the criteria for certification from the International Society of
Arboriculture and maintains accreditation and who possesses and maintains a Tree Risk
Assessment Qualification.

Canopy: the area above ground that is covered by the trunk, branches, and foliage of a tree crown
or group of tree crowns.

Canopy coverage: the amount of tree canopy that will be provided for a given lot or parcel
through any combination of preserved trees and planting new trees, expressed as the sum of all
the canopy coverage of all preserved trees and newly planted trees, divided by the total canopy
coverage for the entire lot or parcel. In general, the formula grants bonus tree canopy credit
based on the existing tree canopy of preserved trees, and grants additional tree canopy credit
based on the projected mature tree canopy of newly planted trees. Individual tree canopy
coverage is identified in the City’s tree list.

City: The City Administrator of the City of Durham or designee.

Crown: The branches and leaves of a tree extending from the trunk.

Dead or Declining Tree: A tree that is lifeless or is in a state of progressive and irreversible
decline, as determined by the project arborist. Among the factors that could be considered to
determine if the tree is lifeless include unseasonable lack of foliage, brittle dry branches, or lack
of any growth during the growing season. Among the factors that could be considered to
determine if the tree is in progressive and irreversible decline include chlorotic foliage, an overall
thinning of the crown, significant branch mortality, top dieback, premature fall coloration and
defoliation, or evidence of disease likely to lead to death.

Diameter at Breast Height (“DBH”): The tree trunk diameter measured at four and a half feet
(4.5’) above mean ground level at the base of the trunk, except that if a tree splits into multiple
trunks above ground but below four and a half feet (4.5’), the trunk is measured at its most
narrow point beneath the split. The diameter is calculated by dividing the circumference by 3.14.
For trees with multiple stems, the DBH shall be the average diameter of all stems measured at a
point no more than six inches (6”) above the surrounding grade or measured six inches below the
point from which all stems digress from the trunk, whichever is larger.

                                                                                                             51 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
Distribution area: The total lot or parcel area of the subject lot or parcel contemplated to be
developed, subtracting the building footprint and hard surfaces.

Hard surface: A man-made surface that reduces or prevents the absorption of water.

Hazard Tree: A tree that presents a high or extreme on the International Society of Arboriculture
qualitative tree risk assessment, as determined by the project arborist.

Owner: Any person who owns a property within the City of Durham upon which a tree’s trunk is
located.

Removal: The cutting down of a tree or removing of more than half of the crown, trunk, or root
system of a tree; or to damage a tree so as to cause the tree to become a dead or declining tree,
or to qualify as a hazard tree, each as determined by an arborist. “Removal" does not include the
normal trimming, pruning, or other maintenance of trees that does not have the effect of causing
the tree to qualify as a hazard tree or dead or declining tree, as determined by an arborist.

Structure: A building having walls and a roof, whether or not it is erected or set upon an individual
foundation or slab constructed base which is designed or used for the housing, shelter,
enclosure, or support of persons, animals, or property of any kind.

Tree: A woody plant having a DBH of six inches (6”) or larger. If a tree splits into multiple trunks
above ground, but below four and a half feet (4.5’), it is considered one tree. If the tree splits into
multiple trunks below ground, each trunk shall be considered one tree.

Tree Grove: A group of six or more trees at least 12 inches in diameter, or Oregon white oak trees
or Pacific madrone trees that are at least 6 inches in diameter, and that form a generally
continuous canopy, or are spaced as appropriate for that species or species assemblage. Groves
are generally non-linear. Other trees and understory vegetation located within the grove are
considered part of the grove and are counted as part of the canopy area. A tree grove may be
identified by an arborist, based on the types, configuration, or functions of a grouping of trees.
Functions include structural support and wind protection for the trees within the grove,
microclimate and shade, and habitat such as nesting, foraging, and cover for birds and other
wildlife.

                                                                                                             52 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
Tree Protection Zone: An area around the trunk of each preserved tree measured from the trunk
of the preserved tree outwards at a distance of an additional one foot (1’) for each inch at DBH of
such preserved tree.

        Trunk: The main stem of a tree that connects the roots to the branches.

Preserved Tree. A tree that has been designated in a Tree Preservation Plan to be preserved.

Tree Preservation Plan. A document describing the scope of work to identify, protect, and
manage preserved trees, created by a Project Arborist.

5.4     Tree Removal Compliance Required.
No person may remove a tree without first demonstrating compliance with the terms of this
Chapter.

5.5     Tree Removal Requirements.
5.5.1   An application that contemplates removing a tree or trees as further identified in Section
5.2 of this Chapter shall include a report identifying the following:

5.5.1.1          An inventory of all trees on the subject lot or parcel listing all of the following:

5.5.1.1.1        An assigned number for each tree;

5.5.1.1.2        The tree type or common name, genus, and species for each tree;

5.5.1.1.3        DBH for each tree; and

5.5.1.1.4        For each tree, whether that tree is proposed to be preserved or removed.

5.5.1.2          A Tree Preservation Plan, prepared by the Project Arborist, that consists of the
following:

5.5.1.2.1        A map drawn to scale of the subject lot or parcel and any lots or parcels resulting
from a land division, indicating the location, size, species, and tag identification number for all
trees on-site. Trees proposed for preservation and trees proposed for removal must be clearly
labeled on the map, as well as all existing and proposed public and private improvements and or
easement(s);

                                                                                                            53 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.5.1.2.2        A tree assessment report prepared by the Project Arborist that includes an
inventory of trees proposed for preservation and removal, indicating species, condition,
diameter DBH, estimated canopy square footage, and likelihood of survival in light of the
development proposed; and

5.5.1.2.3        The specific steps that the Applicant will take for tree preservation and protection
during all phases of construction, including, but not limited to, excavation, grading, filling,
cutting, augering, trenching, digging, tree repair and removal, pruning and structural support,
fertilization, and aeration.

5.5.1.2.4        The proposed mitigation plan demonstrating compliance with Section 5.7.

5.5.1.3          Demonstration of compliance with one of the following tree preservation
requirements:

5.5.1.3.1        Percentage Compliance.

5.5.1.3.1.1      At least 20% of all trees on the subject lot or parcel must be preserved, excluding
any dead or declining tree or any hazard tree; AND

5.5.1.3.1.2      At least 40% of the subject lot’s or parcel’s existing canopy coverage must

be preserved; AND

5.5.1.3.1.3      The preserved trees must be dispersed across at least 50% of the distribution area
(see definitions).

5.5.1.3.2        Discretionary Compliance. If an applicant under this Section is unable to comply
with the requirements of 5.5.1.3.1, then the applicant must submit a written narrative and
supporting information demonstrating that compliance with either one or both of these
subsections is not possible and that removing more trees than allowed by these subsections is
necessary due to one or more of the following:

5.5.1.3.2.1      Removal is necessary due to existing or proposed utilities that cannot be relocated
to an alternative location.

                                                                                                            54 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.5.1.3.2.2       Removal is necessary due to the topography of the subject lot or parcel and the
tree(s) is located within or abutting areas of cuts or fills that are deemed threatening to the life of
the tree, as determined by the Project Arborist.

5.5.2    Applicant’s payment of any tree removal application fee established via resolution.

5.5.3    The removal of trees under this Section shall be subject to mitigation under Section 5.7.

5.5.4    The city will deny any application contemplated in Section 5.2 unless the applicant
submits all materials identified in this Section 5.5.

5.6      Means of Preserving Trees.
5.6.1    The city shall include the following provisions as conditions of approval for any decision
contemplated in Section 5.2:

5.6.1.1           Mark all trees with a tagging system that corresponds to the applicant’s Tree
Preservation Plan.

5.6.1.2           Install construction fencing at least four feet (4’) high around each tree protection
zone.

5.6.1.3           Within each tree protection zone, install a layer of wood chips or mulch at least
four inches (4”) deep and, on top of the layer of wood chips or mulch, install three-quarter inch
(3/4”) plywood.

5.6.1.4           The Project Arborist shall oversee all excavation within each tree protection zone.

5.6.1.5           Prior to the cutting or pruning of any preserved tree’s root that is two inches (2”) in
diameter or greater, the Project Arborist shall evaluate the root to be pruned or cut and inform
the City if such cutting or pruning is, in the Project Arborist’s opinion, likely to result in a dead or
dying tree. If the cutting or pruning is likely to result in a dead or dying tree, then the applicant
shall mitigate the tree in accordance with Section 5.7.

5.6.1.6           All pruned or cut roots shall be immediately covered with soil or mulch and
watered.

                                                                                                               55 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.6.1.7           Immediately repair or mitigate and report to the City any damage to a preserved
tree.

5.6.1.8           Water preserved trees in accordance with the preserved trees’ needs, as identified
by the Project Arborist.

5.6.2    The City shall have the right to inspect the preserved trees for two years following the
issuance of a land use approval under Section 5.2 If any preserved tree becomes a dead or
declining tree prior to the expiration of the two years, the preserved tree shall be replaced by the
applicant in accordance with Sections 5.7.3 and 5.7.4 of this Chapter.

5.7      Mitigation.
5.7.1    The applicant shall perform mitigation for any tree removed pursuant to this Chapter.
Mitigation shall also be required for any tree removed in violation of this Chapter.

5.7.2    Removed trees shall be replaced with mitigation trees to the extent that, at maturity, the
mitigation trees shall equal the canopy coverage of the removed trees or canopy coverage
equivalent to 35% of the square footage of the subject lot or parcel, whichever is less. Mature
canopy coverage shall be as set forth on the City’s tree list based on the tree species.

5.7.3    The canopy of each preserved tree can receive credit for 130% of its existing canopy size.
The total credit of all existing canopies shall be counted toward the 35% coverage requirement.
For example, a 10,000 square foot subject lot would require 3,500 square feet of canopy. An
existing Black Hawthorne has 314 square feet of existing canopy. This lot would receive a credit
of 408.2 square feet, leaving 3,091.8 square feet that will need to be mitigated by mitigation
trees.

5.7.4    The species of mitigation trees shall be selected from the City’s tree list. The minimum
size of a mitigation tree at time of planting shall be one and three quarters inches (1 3/4”) in
diameter when measured from the top of the root ball for deciduous trees. Evergreen trees shall
be a minimum of six feet (6’) tall measured from the top of the root ball, excluding the leader.

5.7.5    Mitigation trees shall be located as follows, except to the extent that the mitigation trees
or trees naturally grow in a tree grove, as identified by the Project Arborist:

                                                                                                             56 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.7.5.1          Trees categorized as small on the City’s tree list shall be spaced no closer than
fifteen feet (15’) on center from other trees and no closer than ten feet (10’) measured from the
foundation of any existing or contemplated structure.

5.7.5.2          Trees categorized as medium on the City’s list shall be spaced no closer than
twenty feet (20’) on center from other trees and no closer than ten feet (10’) measured from the
foundation of any existing structure or structure contemplated within the proposed development
application or future phases.

5.7.5.3          Trees categorized as large on the City’s tree list shall be spaced no closer than
thirty feet (30’) on center from other trees and no closer than fifteen feet (15’) from the
foundation of any existing structure or structure contemplated within the proposed development
application or future phases.

5.7.5.4          A mitigation tree shall be planted no less than six feet (6’) from any existing hard
surface or hard surface contemplated within the proposed development application or future
phases.

5.7.5.5          Mitigation trees shall be distributed across at least 50% of the distribution area
(see definitions).

5.7.5.6          The City shall identify trees as “small,” “medium,” and “large” on the City’s tree list.

5.7.6   When the subject lot or parcel from which trees are removed cannot accommodate the
required number and spacing of mitigation trees, the applicant shall pay the City a fee in lieu of
replacement. The fee in lieu shall be in amount set by resolution.

5.7.7   Trees removed for the purpose of installation of infrastructure upon a division of land may
be mitigated by planting the required mitigation trees upon any resulting lot or parcel within the
same land division. Such trees will be required to be planted outside the anticipated footprint of
any future structure or within required structural setback areas. When vertical construction
commences on-site, the developer shall receive a credit of 100% for each species planted
towards the required canopy coverage for the subject lot or parcel.

                                                                                                             57 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.7.8    Mitigation planting must be completed and proof of mitigation planting must be
submitted to the City within six (6) months of the issuance of a land use approval under Section
5.2 or prior to the issuance of any building permits for the subject lot or parcel (if required),
whichever is later. The City may grant a sixty (60) day extension if the City finds abnormal weather
conditions require delay. Additional time beyond the sixty (60) day extension shall be subject to
Planning Commission approval.

5.8      Violations and Penalties.
5.8.1    Any person who removes a tree in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the
provisions of this Section.

5.8.2    Any person who fails to comply with any land use approval condition relating to tree
removal in violation of this Chapter shall be subject to the provisions of this Section.

5.8.3    In the event of a violation of this Chapter, the City may proceed with any one or more of
the following:

5.8.3.1           Issue a stop work order for the property upon which the violation allegedly
occurred, which shall remain in place until the violation is resolved through mitigation;

5.8.3.2           Assess a penalty in the amount established by ordinance or resolution;

5.8.3.3           Pursue any other remedy available to the City at law or in equity, including but not
limited to revoking the associated land use approval.

5.8.4    Violations of this Chapter are continuing in nature and shall be deemed to occur for each
day that the violation exists until the violation is resolved. Each tree removal or other instance of
non-compliance shall constitute a separate violation.

5.8.5    The City Administrator is authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to
adopt, implement and update all staff policies, tree lists, and other documents required to carry
out the provisions of this Chapter.

                                                                                                             58 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
5.9     Tree Removal Modifications.
5.9.1   A major modification to a land use decision that contemplates removing a tree or trees as
further identified in Section 5.2 of this Chapter is one that will have significant impacts on the
development or on the subject lot or parcel. Major changes include:

5.9.1.1          An increase in the removal of trees exceeding standards outlined in the  outlined in
Section 5.5.1.3.1; or

5.9.1.2          More than a combined total diameter of 24 inches of additional tree removal,
whichever is less.

5.9.2   A minor modification to a land use decision that contemplates removing a tree or trees as
further identified in Section 5.2.2.2 “Scope” of this Chapter is one that is not a major
modification. A minor modification shall follow Section 9.5 “Type 1 Process.”

5.9.3   Major modifications shall proceed in accordance with Section 10.5 “Major Modifications
to Existing or Approved Land Use.”

                                                                                                            59 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
    6
