LAND DIVISIONS

8.1     Relation to State Law.
This Chapter provides the process and standards by which the City shall consider and approve
the tentative plans and final plats of partitions, property line adjustments, replats and
subdivisions, including land divisions to be developed as multi-unit or planned residential
developments or business parks.

8.1.1   All terms used in this Chapter are as defined by ORS Chapter 92. In case of any conflict
between the requirements of this Chapter and those of ORS Chapter 92, the requirements of
state law shall control.

8.2     Application Requirements.
An applicant for approval of a tentative plan of a partition, replat or subdivision shall submit, in a
form acceptable to the City:

8.2.1   The person’s ownership- or other interest in the property that is the subject of the
application; or, if the applicant is not the owner, proof that the applicant is authorized to act on
the owner’s behalf.

8.2.1.1          A purchaser under a land sale contract and a private or public entity that gives
notice of intent to acquire by eminent domain shall be deemed to have an ownership interest in
property for purposes of this section.

8.2.2   A vicinity map at a scale of 1"= 400' showing the relation of the subject property to
adjacent property, streets, public ways within or adjacent to the tract, easements, railroad rights-
of-way, section lines and corners, City boundaries and monuments;

8.2.3   Existing uses of the property, including location of all existing structures to remain on the
property after platting;

8.2.4   Proposed lot lines showing dimensions and area and proposed lot and block numbers;

8.2.5   Contour lines related to some established bench mark or other datum as allowed by the
City Engineer with intervals at a minimum of 2 feet for slopes up to 5 percent, and 5 feet for

                                                                                                            89 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
slopes over 5 percent, and any proposed grade changes to be shown at minimum intervals of ½
foot;

8.2.6   The location of at least one temporary bench mark within the plat boundaries.

8.2.7   In addition to those requirements, an applicant for a land division other than for a
property line adjustment also shall submit:

8.2.7.1          Any and all unsubdivided land ownerships and zoning districts lying on and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision or partition, the proposed extension of adjacent streets,
proposed dedications of public right of way and proposed boundaries of tracts to be dedicated
to a public purpose, all lands within a radius of 1/2 mile from the proposed new streets within the
proposed subdivision and their connection with adjacent streets;

8.2.7.2          Approximate centerline profiles showing the finished grade of all streets when built
to the standards of this Code including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the
proposed subdivision or partition;

8.2.7.3          Approximate plan and profiles of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades
and pipe sizes indicated, plan of the proposed water distribution systems showing pipe sizes and
the location of valves and fire hydrants, the location of existing sewers, water drains, culverts,
and drain pipes, electric conduits or lines proposed to be used on the property to be subdivided
and invert elevations of sewers at point of proposed connection, all at a scale of 1"= 100';

8.2.7.4          The location and direction of all water courses and Water Quality Sensitive Areas
on site or within 200 feet of the site, with an approved Development Site Assessment as required
by Clean Water Services’ current version of Design and Construction Standards for Sanitary and
Surface Water Management;

8.2.7.5          Existing natural features, rock outcroppings, marshes, riparian areas, slopes with
25 percent or higher grade, upland vegetated corridors, the type and location of other wooded
areas, the type and location of all existing trees that are within the scope of this Code, and all
other data required to address the performance standards of the Metro Urban Growth
Management Functional Plan Title 3 relating to water quality, flood management and fish and
wildlife conservation;
                                                                                                           90 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.2.7.6          A title “Tentative Plan- (Proposed Name) Subdivision” (or Partition), subject to the
naming restrictions of ORS 92.090;

8.2.7.7          The date, north point, and scale of the tentative plan on a sheet 18x24 inches or a
multiple thereof at a scale of 1 inch=100 feet;

8.2.7.8          The location by section, township and range, with a legal description in a form
acceptable to the county surveyor. and county tax assessor; and

8.2.7.9          The names and addresses of the owner or owners, applicant, and engineer or
surveyor:

8.2.8   An applicant for a land division shall access control measures, such as driveway and road
spacing, median control and signal spacing, if any, that are consistent with the functions,
capacities and performance standards of facilities identified in the City’s Transportation System
Plan.

8.3     Approval Criteria for Tentative Plan.
The City may approve a tentative plan of a partition, replat or subdivision if it finds:

8.3.1   The dimensions of all planned lots meet the dimension, setback, and area requirements
of this Code or the City has approved an adjustment or variance as to those requirements;

8.3.2   Oversized lots are of a size and shape that allows future division of those lots, and public
and private infrastructure to serve those lots is sufficient to serve any future divisions of those
lots;

8.3.3   The location, dimension and grade of all existing and planned bicycle, motor vehicle and
pedestrian rights of way are consistent with the City’s transportation systems plan as to
circulation, connectivity, and protection of transportation facilities, and all lots have access to
public right of way;

8.3.4   All proposed dedications of public access and rights of way, public and private
easements and tracts for dedicated purposes for private or public ownership are clearly
delineated and of sufficient location and dimension for the intended purpose, and are conveyed
in a writing in a form acceptable to the City Attorney;

                                                                                                             91 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.3.5    All necessary public utilities are available to serve the development and all utility lines
serving more than one lot are located in public easements;

8.3.6    All required local, state and federal permits required for the land division have been
obtained or the City finds that it is feasible that as a condition of approval the applicant shall
obtain those permits prior to final plat approval; and,

8.3.7    The plan otherwise complies with provisions of this Code as to access ways, tree
protection, flood plain regulation and any special regulations as to the use(s) proposed for the
property to be divided; and,

8.3.8    The proposed plat name and the proposed name(s) of any new street(s) have not been
recorded as to property in any other location in the City or county, respectively.

8.3.9    The city shall consider an application for a land division in a residential district other than
a planned residential development for any area that comprises at least two times the minimum
lot size in that district.

8.4      Property Line Adjustment.
The city may approve a property line adjustment if the applicant shows by substantial evidence
that:

8.4.1    The dimensions of all lots after the adjustment would meet the dimension requirements
of this Code, or that the city has approved an adjustment or variance as to those dimensions;

8.4.2    The property line adjustment if allowed will not conflict with any prior city land use
approval or encumber a public easement; and,

8.4.3    All critical public facilities and services are available and have adequate capacity to serve
the site; and,

8.4.4    The adjustment if allowed will not eliminate pedestrian or vehicle access from the public
right of way to either property; and,

8.4.5    The adjustment if allowed will not create a parcel that lies in multiple zoning districts.

                                                                                                             92 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.5      Lot Legalization.
A person may apply to validate a unit of land that was created prior to January 1, 2007 by a sale
that did not comply with the applicable criteria for creation of a unit of land, if the unit of land
was not lawfully established and if it could have complied with the applicable criteria for
creation of a lawfully established unit of land in effect when the unit of land was sold.

8.5.1    The City shall review an application to validate a unit of land by the process and the
criteria in this Code for a property line adjustment, if the unit of land shares a common property
line with only one other abutting property, or by the process and criteria in this Code for a
partition.

8.5.2    The City may consider and approve an application to validate a parcel of land
notwithstanding that less than all of the owners of the existing lawfully established unit of land
have applied for the approval.

8.5.3    A unit of land for which the City has approved an application for lot legalization shall not
be lawfully established unless and until the owner records a final land division with the county
surveyor within 90 days after the date of the City’s approval.

8.6      Expedited Land Division.
A person may apply for an expedited land division to create three or fewer parcels for residential
use, including recreational or open space uses accessory to residential use, according to the
procedures provided for in ORS 197.360 et. seq., as amended from time to time.

8.6.1    In the case of any conflict between the provisions of ORS 197.360 et seq. and this Code
as to the process for review, those provisions of state law shall control.

8.7      Final Plat Approval.
The City may require such changes in a final subdivision or partition plat submitted for the City’s
approval as are necessary for compliance with the terms of the City’s approval of the tentative
plan for the same.

8.7.1    A final plat of a land division shall not be approved that does not include the survey- and
graphical detail required by ORS 92.050 and as may be further required by the Washington
County Surveyor.
                                                                                                              93 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.7.1.1          Monuments shall be placed and a survey shall be submitted for recording in the
form required by Oregon law. All such monuments must remain intact before the City may grant
final plat approval.

8.8      Land Division Review Process.
An application for approval of a tentative plan, for a land division other than for an expedited land
division or a property line adjustment, and for an application to substantially modify an already
approved tentative plan for a land division, shall be reviewed by a Type 2 process.

8.8.1   An application for an expedited land division shall be reviewed solely by the process set
out in ORS 197.360 et seq. A decision on an application for an expedited land division is not a
land use decision.

8.8.2   An application for a property line adjustment shall be reviewed by a Type 1 process. An
application for a partition shall be reviewed by a Type 2 process.

8.8.3   The City shall not consider for approval a plat for any proposed subdivision or partition
until it has approved the tentative plan for same. The City’s approval of a final plat that
substantially conforms to all conditions of the City’s approval of the tentative plan for the same
subdivision or partition shall not constitute a “land use decision” as that term is defined by state
law.

8.9     Middle housing expedited land division.
8.9.1   Purpose, authority, and applicability.

8.9.1.1          The Middle Housing Land Division process supports homeownership by allowing
lots with middle housing to divide such that each middle housing dwelling is on its own lot. As
used in this section, a “middle housing land division” is the division of a lot or parcel on which
the development of middle housing is allowed under ORS 197.758 (2) or (3). A “middle housing
expedited land division” includes both a preliminary approval and a final plat and is not a land
use decision or a limited land use decision under ORS 197.015.

8.9.1.2          City may approve a tentative plan for a middle housing land division if the
application meets all the requirements of 8.9.2.

                                                                                                             94 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.1.3          City may place additional conditions on a middle housing land division according
to 8.9.2.

8.9.1.4          City will review applications for middle housing land divisions according to
submittal requirements and review timeline detailed in 8.9.3.

8.9.1.5          City will process appeals to middle housing land divisions according to 8.9.3.

8.9.1.6          The provisions below and cross referenced in this section only apply to middle
housing land divisions permitted on or after July 1, 2022.

8.9.2   Review Criteria and Standards. The City shall approve a Middle Housing Land Division
upon finding:

8.9.2.1          The parent parcel is developed with Middle Housing or the application for land
division is concurrent with a building permit for construction of middle housing on the parcel.

8.9.2.2          Each resulting middle housing lot or parcel shall contain no more than one
dwelling unit except for lots, parcels, or tracts used as common areas. For the purposes of this
section, an Accessory Dwelling Unit is not a dwelling unit.

8.9.2.3          Each lot is served with utilities separately.

8.9.2.4          All easements necessary for each dwelling unit shall be provided.  Easements
shall ensure provision of and access for maintenance and replacement to all utilities; pedestrian
access from each dwelling unit to a private or public road; all dedicated driveways, parking,
common use areas, shared building elements, and dedicated common area can be accessed
and used.

8.9.2.5          Evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates buildings or structures on a
resulting middle housing lot or parcel will comply with applicable building code provisions
relating to new property lines and how buildings or structures located on new lots/parcels will
comply with Oregon residential specialty code.

8.9.2.6          The City shall apply additional conditions to the approval of a tentative plan for a
middle housing land division to prohibit the further division of the resulting middle housing lots

                                                                                                            95 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
or parcels, and require that a notation appear on the final plat indicating that approval was given
under 8.9 Middle Housing Expedited Land Divisions.

8.9.2.7          The type of middle housing developed on the parent parcel is not altered by a
middle housing expedited land division.

8.9.2.8          Where the parent parcel abuts the street and dedication or frontage improvements
consistent with Section 3.7.3 were not provided when the lot or parcel was created,
improvements shall be provided that meet the standards of Section 3.7.3.

8.9.2.9          The standards of Sections 8.1-8.8 do not apply to the Middle Housing Expedited
Land Division.

8.9.2.10         The City shall not enforce any provision in a recorded instrument affecting real
property that is executed on or after August 8, 2019 if the provision would allow the development
of a single-family dwelling on the real property but would prohibit the development of, or the
partitioning or subdividing of lands according to, the provisions of Section 8.9 of the following:

8.9.2.10.1       Middle housing, as defined in ORS 197.758 (Development of Middle Housing;
Local Regulations); or

8.9.2.10.2       An accessory dwelling unit allowed under ORS 197.312 (5) (Limitation on City and
County Prohibitions – Needed Housing within UGBs).

8.9.2.11         The City shall not require a final plat before it issues building permits.

8.9.2.12         Planned Developments and Planned Communities.  For development created
through Sections 4.2 and 4.3 (Planned Residential Development) or ORS 94.550-94.783 the
following shall apply:

8.9.2.12.1       Lots or parcels resulting from the division of land in a planned community are
subject to the governing documents of the planned community and are allocated assessments
and voting right on the same basis as existing units.

8.9.2.12.2       Judicial partition by division of a lot in a planned community is not allowed unless
the declaration expressly allows the division of lots in a planned community; or the lot may be
divided under ORS 94.776 (Restrictions on Allowable Maximum Density Prohibited).
                                                                                                           96 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.2.12.3       The lot may be partitioned by sale and divisions of the proceeds under ORS
105.245 (Sale or Partition Ordered by Court).

8.9.2.12.4       The restrictions noted above do not apply if the homeowners’ association has
removed the property from the provisions of the declaration.

8.9.3   Procedures. Unless the applicant requests to use the procedures in 8.1-8.8, the following
procedure for Middle Housing Expedited Land Division shall be available.

8.9.3.1          Pre-Application Conference.  A pre-application conference is not required.

8.9.3.2          Neighborhood Meeting. A neighborhood meeting is not required.

8.9.3.3          Application Requirements. Applications for development permits shall be
submitted upon forms established by the City.  Applications will not be accepted in partial
submittals. All of the following items must be submitted to initiate the completeness review:

8.9.3.3.1        Application form, including required notarized signature(s) that demonstrate
consent of all owners of the affected property;

8.9.3.3.2        Deed, title report or other proof of ownership;

8.9.3.3.3        Information addressing the criteria of Section 8.9.2 in sufficient detail for review
and action;

8.9.3.3.4        Plans required for the particular type of application as noted by staff on the
application checklist;

8.9.3.3.5        Application narrative to address applicable code approval criteria and standards
as noted on the completed application checklist; and

8.9.3.3.6        Payment of the required fee.

8.9.3.4          Completeness review. The City shall review the application submittal and advise
the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete within twenty-one (21)
calendar days after the city receives the application submittal.

                                                                                                            97 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.3.4.1        Incompleteness shall be based solely on failure to pay required fees, failure of the
applicant’s narrative to address the relevant criteria or development standards, or failure to
supply the required information listed in the checklist and shall not be based on differences of
opinion as to quality or accuracy.  Determination that an application is complete indicates only
that the application contains the information necessary for a qualitative review of compliance
with the Development Code standards.

8.9.3.4.2        If the application was complete when first submitted or the applicant submits the
additional information within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted, approval
or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were in effect at
the time the application was first submitted.

8.9.3.4.3        If an application is incomplete, the completeness notice shall list what
information is missing and allow the applicant to submit the missing information.  The
completeness notice shall include a form, designed to be returned to the City by the applicant,
indicating whether or not the applicant intends to amend or supplement the application.

8.9.3.5          Notification. The City shall provide written notice of the receipt of the completed
application for a middle housing expedited land division to the applicant and/or authorized
representative; and the owner(s) of record of the subject property; and any City-recognized
neighborhood association whose boundaries include or are within one hundred (100) feet of the
subject property; and owners of record within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the
subject property and affected city departments, governmental agency, or special district
responsible for providing public facilities or services which is entitled to notice under an
intergovernmental agreement with the City which includes provision for such notice or is
otherwise entitled to such notice.

8.9.3.5.1        The notice shall state the street address or other easily understood geographical
reference to the subject property; a time and place where copies of all evidence submitted by
the applicant will be available for review; by commonly used citation, the applicable criteria for
the decision; the name and telephone number of a local government contact person; a brief
summary of the local decision-making process for the Middle Housing Expedited Land Division.

                                                                                                            98 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.3.5.2        The notice shall state that the issues that may provide the basis for an appeal to
the hearings officer must be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period; that
the issues must be raised with sufficient specificity to enable the local government to respond to
the issue, and the place, date and time that comments are due.

8.9.3.5.3        For purposes of appeal to the hearings officer under ORS 197.375 (Appeal of Local
Government to Referee; Court of Appeals), this requirement shall be deemed met when the City
can provide an affidavit or other certification that such notice was given.

8.9.3.5.4        After notification according to the procedure set out above, the City shall provide a
14-day period for submission of written comments prior to the decision.

8.9.3.6          Decision. The City shall make a decision to approve or deny the application within
63 days of receiving a completed application, based on whether it satisfies the substantive
requirements of Section 8.9.2.

8.9.3.6.1        Approval may include conditions to ensure that the application meets the
applicable land use regulations.

8.9.3.6.2        For applications subject to Section 8.9, the City shall not hold a hearing on the
application; and shall issue a written determination of compliance or noncompliance with
applicable land use regulations that includes a summary statement explaining the
determination.

8.9.3.6.3        The decision shall include a statement of the facts upon which the decision
authority relied to determine whether the application satisfied or failed to satisfy each applicable
approval.

8.9.3.6.4        Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and to those who received
notice under subsection (1) of this section within sixty-three (63) days of the date of a completed
application. The notice of decision shall include the summary statement described in (4)(b) of
this subsection; and an explanation of appeal rights under ORS 197.375 (Appeal of decision on
application for expedited land division).

                                                                                                            99 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.3.7          Appeals. An appeal of a decision made under this section shall be made as
follows:

8.9.3.7.1        An appeal must be filed within fourteen (14) days of mailing of the notice of the
decision and be accompanied by the applicable deposit for costs.

8.9.3.7.2        A decision may be appealed by the applicant; or any person or organization who
filed written comments within the 14-day comment period.

8.9.3.7.3        An appeal shall be based solely on allegations of violation of the substantive
provisions of the applicable land use regulations; of unconstitutionality of the decision; that the
application is not eligible for review under 6.0500 or ORS 197.360 to 197.380 and should be
reviewed as a land use decision or limited land use decision; or that the parties’ substantive
rights have been substantially prejudiced by an error in procedure.

8.9.3.7.4        The local government shall designate the hearings officer as the referee for
appeals of a decision made under this section and ORS 197.360 and 197.365.

8.9.3.7.5        Within seven days of receiving the appeal, the City, on behalf of the hearings
officer, shall notify the applicant, the appellant if other than the applicant, any person or
organization entitled to notice under Section 8.9.3.5 that provided written comments to the local
government and all providers of public facilities and services entitled to notice under Section
8.9.3.5          and advise them of the manner in which they may participate in the appeal. A
person or organization that provided written comments to the local government but did not file
an appeal under this section may participate only with respect to the issues raised in the written
comments submitted by that person or organization. The hearings officer may use any procedure
for decision-making consistent with the interests of the parties to ensure a fair opportunity to
present information and argument. The hearings officer shall provide the local government an
opportunity to explain its decision but is not limited to reviewing the local government decision
and may consider information not presented to the local government.

8.9.3.7.6        The hearings officer shall apply the substantive requirements of Section 8.9.2 and
ORS 197.360. If the hearings officer determines that the application does not qualify as an
expedited land division [as described in ORS 197.360] or a middle housing land division, as

                                                                                                          100 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
defined in Section 8.9.1.1, the hearings officer shall remand the application for consideration as
a land use decision or limited land use decision. In all other cases, the hearings officer shall seek
to identify means by which the application can satisfy the applicable requirements.

8.9.3.7.7        The hearings officer shall not reduce the density of the land division application.

8.9.3.8          Written decision. The hearings officer shall make a written decision approving or
denying the application or approving it with conditions designed to ensure that the application
satisfies the land use regulations, within 42 days of the filing of an appeal. The hearings officer
shall not remand the application to the local government for any reason other than as set forth in
this subsection.

8.9.3.9          Unless the City Council finds exigent circumstances, a hearings officer who fails to
issue a written decision within 42 days of the filing of an appeal shall receive no compensation
for service as hearings officer in the appeal.

8.9.3.10         Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the hearings officer shall order the
local government to refund the deposit for costs to an appellant who materially improves his or
her position from the decision of the local government. The hearings officer shall assess the cost
of the appeal in excess of the deposit for costs, up to a maximum of $500, including the deposit
paid under this section, against an appellant who does not materially improve his or her position
from the decision of the local government. The local government shall pay the portion of the
costs of the appeal not assessed against the appellant. The costs of the appeal include the
compensation paid the hearings officer and costs incurred by the local government, but not the
costs of other parties.

8.9.3.11         The Land Use Board of Appeals does not have jurisdiction to consider any
decisions, aspects of decisions or actions made under ORS 197.360 to 197.380 (Expedited and
Middle Housing Expedited Land Divisions) or 8.9.1.2.

8.9.3.12         Any party to a proceeding before a hearings officer under this section may seek
judicial review of the hearings officer’s decision in the manner provided for review of final orders
of the Land Use Board of Appeals under ORS 197.850 and 197.855. The Court of Appeals shall
review decisions of the hearings officer in the same manner as provided for review of final orders

                                                                                                           101 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
of the Land Use Board of Appeals in those statutes. However, notwithstanding ORS 197.850 (9)
or any other provision of law, the court shall reverse or remand the decision only if the court
finds:

8.9.3.13         That the decision does not concern an expedited land division as described in ORS
197.360 or middle housing land division as defined in section 2 of this 2021 Act and the
appellant raised this issue in proceedings before the hearings officer;

8.9.3.14         That there is a basis to vacate the decision as described in ORS 36.705 (1)(a) to (d),
or a basis for modification or correction of an award as described in ORS 36.710; or

8.9.3.15         That the decision is unconstitutional.

8.9.3.16         Expiration. The tentative approval of a Middle Housing Expedited Land Division is
void if a final plat is not recorded within three years of the tentative approval.

8.9.4   Middle Housing Final Plat. The final plat shall comply with the Middle Housing Preliminary
Plan conditions of approval.

8.9.4.1          The following data requirements, if applicable, shall also be shown on the final
plat.

8.9.4.1.1        All tracts of land intended to be deeded or dedicated for public use.

8.9.4.2          Approval Criteria. The City shall approve or deny the final plat for the Middle
Housing Land Division. Approval shall be based on the following criteria: Lands to be deeded or
dedicated for public use are provided for on the final plat or on separate documents; an
approved guarantee of completion for required public improvements that have not been
completed and accepted by the City; an approved grading and drainage plan if grading is
required; approved construction drawings for required public improvements, and all conditions
of tentative middle housing land division approval have been met and the final plat substantially
conforms to the provisions of the approved tentative middle housing land division.

8.9.4.3          Recordation. Following review and City’s approval of a final partition plat, the
applicant shall take the following actions:

                                                                                                           102 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
8.9.4.3.1        Obtain the approval signature on the final Middle Housing Land Division plat by the
County Surveyor certifying that the final partition plat complies with all applicable survey laws.
Before certifying, the surveyor may make field investigations to verify that the plat survey is
sufficiently accurate. If the surveyor determines that the plat does not comply, the applicant
shall make corrections. When the surveyor determines that the plat conforms, the surveyor shall
sign and date the plat.

8.9.4.3.2        A Notice of Middle Housing Land Division for each middle housing lot shall be
recorded with the county recorder that states:

8.9.4.3.3        The middle housing lot may not be further divided.

8.9.4.3.4        No more than one unit of middle housing may be developed on each middle
housing lot.

8.9.4.3.5        The dwelling developed on the middle housing lot is a unit of middle housing and is
not a single attached or detached dwelling, or any other housing type.

8.9.4.3.6        File a statement of water right and, if a water right is appurtenant, a copy of the
acknowledgment from the Water Resources Department.

8.9.4.3.7        Deliver the approved final partition plat and accompanying documents to the
county recorder for recording.

8.9.4.3.8        Return a copy of the recorded Notices of Middle Housing Land Division to the City
for filing.

                                                                                                          103 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
    9
