ADJUSTMENT, VARIANCE, NON-CONFORMING USE, MAJOR
        MODIFICATION

10.1    Scope.
Upon application and after notice and hearing, the City may grant an adjustment from certain
dimensional requirements and an adjustment or variance from certain use restrictions of this
Code.

10.1.1  Lot size averaging proposed as part of an application for a land division shall be reviewed
as an application for an adjustment or for a variance depending on the maximum deviation
proposed from the standard lot dimensions in that zoning district.

10.2    Adjustment.
The City may allow an adjustment of up to 10 percent to one or more numerical or dimensional
requirements of this Code as to floor area, frontage, grading, height, lot size, the number and
dimension of motor vehicle parking spaces, residential density, setbacks, signs and
transportation facilities if the City finds, for an adjustment:

10.2.1  that natural conditions or practical difficulties exist that are unique to the property
described in the application;

10.2.2  that granting the adjustment shall allow for site design that remains consistent with the
purpose of the underlying zoning district

10.2.3  that allowing an adjustment furthers another public purpose such as to increase
residential density to meet state and regional goals or to reduce residential density in areas of
regionally significant wildlife habitat, to preserve natural resources, to enhance access to or
protection of transportation facilities, and similar other goals.

10.3    Variance.
The City may allow a variance greater than that allowed by an adjustment from the limitations on
uses allowed by this Code and a variance from a numerical or dimensional requirement of this
Code as to the site and design features for which the City may allow an Adjustment if the City
finds that, as to the property proposed for a variance:

                                                                                                         123 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
10.3.1  Natural conditions or practical difficulties exist on the property which do not result from
the property owner’s own actions, such as lot size or shape legally created prior to adoption of
this Code, or topography or similar circumstances over which the owner has no control;

10.3.2  Literal enforcement of the requirements of this Code from which a variance is sought
would necessarily result in financial hardship without corresponding public benefit;

10.3.3  The variance would not alter the character of the neighborhood nor impair the appropriate
use or site development or land division of neighboring property;

10.3.4  The variance to be granted is the minimum necessary to cure the hardship; and,

10.3.5           As to a variance from a limitation on use, the use(s) that would be allowed by
granting the variance will be compatible with other uses allowed in that zoning district and
compatible with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan as to that district.

10.3.6           The City may grant an adjustment or variance to allow preservation of natural
resources with a condition of approval that the property owner dedicates a particular tract to that
purpose by fee, conservation easement or restrictive covenant in consideration of the City’s
grant of the adjustment or variance.

10.3.6.1         The City may allow an adjustment or variance that allows reduced residential
density only for property that includes regionally significant fish and wildlife habitat as
determined by Metro or that includes a significant natural resource on the Statewide Planning
Goal 5 resource inventory adopted in the City’s comprehensive land use plan.

10.3.6.2         The City may allow an adjustment or variance for a land division in the NR and NRO
district in the form of reduced lot dimensions or reduced lot setbacks if the site does not meet
the minimum dimensions allowed for a Planned Residential Development so as to allow setting
aside a portion of the site to preserve a significant natural resource.

10.3.7  The City may grant a variance from a floodplain regulation only as allowed by federal law
(44 C.F.R. Part 60.6, as amended from time to time).

10.3.8  An application for an Adjustment shall be reviewed by a Type 2 process. An application for
a Variance shall be reviewed by a Type 3 process.

                                                                                                          124 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
10.4    Non-Conforming Uses.
A land use or a structure or other improvement that exists on property prior to adoption of this
Code and that does not conform to a restriction on use or a required dimension set out in this
Code may continue subject to the limitations of this Section.

10.4.1  A non-conforming structure that is abandoned for a continual period of 1 year or longer,
and a non-conforming use of property other than a structure that is abandoned for a continual
period of 6 months or longer may not be re-used or re-occupied unless and until the City
approves the owner’s application to bring the structure or use into conformance with this Code.

10.4.2  The City on application may allow a variance for the modification of a non-conforming use
or structure so long as the criteria in this Code for a variance are otherwise met and so long as
the net effect of the modification applied for is to bring the use or structure in greater
conformance to this Code. Except for the City’s grant of a variance, no non-conforming land use
or structure may be expanded or enlarged or rebuilt after partial or full destruction by fire or other
cause.

10.4.3  The City on application may allow additions, alterations, rehabilitation or replacement of
existing structures, paved surfaces, accessory uses and other improvements in a water quality
resource area (a vegetated corridor and adjacent water feature as established by CWS or Metro)
or in a flood management area, or both, if the City finds that:

10.4.3.1         the resulting use is allowed by this Code and by relevant federal, state and local
(CWS) law;

10.4.3.2         the resulting improvement does not encroach closer to a protected water feature
than does the existing improvement; and,

10.4.3.3         the addition, alteration, rehabilitation or replacement is accomplished with
erosion control and sediment control as per current CWS standards.

10.4.3.4         The City may impose conditions of approval on an application described in this
section that shall require the applicant to:

                                                                                                          125 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
10.4.3.4.1       demonstrate that no reasonable practicable alternative design or method of
development exists that would have a lesser impact on the water quality resource area than that
which is proposed; and

10.4.3.4.2       if no such alternative exists, limit the disturbance and impact on the water quality
resource to the minimum extent necessary to achieve what the application proposes; and,

10.4.3.4.3       provide mitigation to ensure that the effects on the function and values of the
water quality resource area will be mitigated or restored to the extent practicable.

10.5    Major Modification to Existing or Approved Land Use.
An application for a major modification of an existing, conforming land use or land use approval
is required for the following actions; middle housing is exempt:

10.5.1  any change in land use;

10.5.2  a density increase greater than 10 percent or up to the density limit allowed in the
underlying district, whichever is less;

10.5.3  a change in lot dimension area, setback greater than 10 percent or to the minimum or
maximum applicable dimension allowed in the underlying district, whichever is less;

10.5.4  a change in the type or location or both of access ways or parking areas that will affect
off-site traffic;

10.5.5  an increase in floor area more than 15 percent or up to the floor area allowed in the
underlying district, whichever is less;

10.5.6  a reduction of more than 10 percent in the area reserved for open space; or,

10.5.7  a change to a condition of land use or land division approval that the City finds to have a
potential adverse effect on adjoining property; or

10.5.8  a tree removal modification that exceeds the standards outlined in Section 5.9.1 “Tree
Removal Modification.”

10.5.9  An applicant for a major modification shall submit the same material as required for an
original application for the same use or land division. The City shall review the application by the

                                                                                                           126 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
same process type as would apply to an original application, except that a major modification
that constitutes a conditional use under this Code shall require a Type 3 review process. The City
may approve an application for a major modification with conditions.

                                                                                                       127 | P a g e
DURHAM DEVELOPMENT CODE Rev. 11.13.2025
    11
