Chapter 16.08 DEFINITIONS

16.08.010 Definitions

HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2018-007 on 1/28/2019

16.08.010 Definitions

As used in this title, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the feminine and neuter; the word "may" is discretionary, and the word "shall" is mandatory. The following words and phrases shall mean as follows:

"Access" means the way or means by which pedestrians and/or vehicles enter and leave property.

"Accessory dwelling unit" ("ADU") means a secondary dwelling unit on the same lot as a primary dwelling, and does not include a dwelling unit that comprises a cottage cluster. ADUs are independently habitable and provide the basic requirements of shelter, heating, cooking, and sanitation for one Family. There are two types of ADUs:

1 "Detached ADU" means an ADU that is detached from the primary dwelling, and may include converted detached structures or new construction.

2 "Attached ADU" or "Accessory suite" means an ADU that is part of the primary dwelling or attached to it by means of a common wall, floor, or ceiling. An accessory suite may be established by the conversion of existing living space, attached garages, basements, attics, or by new construction of an addition to the primary dwelling, or a combination of new construction and the conversion of existing space.

"Accessory structure or use" means a structure or use incidental and subordinate to the main use of a property and located on the same lot as the main use.

"Acreage, Net" "Net acreage" means the area on a site which is eligible for development. Net acreage is calculated by subtracting undevelopable land from the total gross acreage of the site. The following areas are deemed undevelopable for the purposes of calculating net acreage:

1 Street dedications and those areas used for private streets and common driveways;

2 Environmentally constrained lands, such as open water areas, floodplains, water quality facilities, wetlands, natural resource areas, and tree preservations areas;

3 Land set aside in separate tracts or dedicated to a public entity for schools, parks, or open space purposes; and

4 Topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than:

1 25 percent within a landslide hazard area may deduct 100 percent of the applicable area, or

2 15 percent and within a landslide hazard area may deduct 50 percent of the applicable area.

"Adult foster care" means any dwelling or facility in which twenty-four (24) hour care is provided for five or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage.

“Aircraft” includes airborne vehicles such as airplanes and helicopters, but not hot air balloons or ultralights.

"Airport" means a tract of land or water that is maintained for the landing and take-off of aircraft, for receiving and discharging passengers and cargo, and the repair, storage, or supplying of aircraft. An airport includes all adjacent land or water used in connection with the aircraft landing or taking off.

“Airport direct impact area” means the area located within 5,000 feet of an airport runway, excluding lands within the runway protection zone and approach surface.

“Airport elevation” means the highest point of an airport's usable runway, measured in feet above mean sea level. “Airport imaginary surfaces” means the imaginary areas in space and on the ground that are established in relation to the airport and its runways. Imaginary areas are defined by the primary surface, runway protection zone, approach surface, horizontal surface, conical surface and transitional surface. “Airport noise impact boundary” means the areas located within 1,500 feet of an airport runway or within established noise contour boundaries exceeding 55 Day Night Average Sound Level (the average sound level over a 24-hour period, with a 10 decibel (dB) penalty added for noise during the nighttime hours of 22:00 to 07:00). “Airport secondary impact area” means the area located between 5,000 and 10,000 feet from an airport runway. “Airport sponsor” means the owner, manager, or other person or entity designated to represent the interests of an airport.

"Alley" means a public way providing a secondary means of access to property.

“Approach surface” (airport) means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface.

1 The inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface and it expands uniformly to a width of 1,250.

2 The approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet at a slope of 20 feet outward for each foot upward.

3 The outer width of an approach surface will be that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing or planned for that runway end.

"Assisted living facility" ("ALF") means a building, complex, or distinct part thereof, consisting of fully self-contained individual living units where six or more seniors and/or adult individuals with disabilities may reside in homelike surroundings. An assisted living facility is licensed to operate as such by the State of Oregon. It offers and coordinates a range of supportive services available on a 24-hour basis to meet the living, health, and social needs of residents. A program approach is used to promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, and independence.

"Automobile."

1 "Body shop garage" is a facility providing for the major repair and maintenance of motor vehicles and includes major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of motor vehicles not in operating condition.

2 "Service station" means any premises used for any or all of the following: supplying gasoline, oil, accessories and services, and auto repair work, excluding body and fender repair, at retail direct to the customer and where inoperative car storage is limited to thirty (30) days.

3 "Wrecking yard" means any property used for the wrecking or storing of two or more motor vehicles or the parts thereof which are not in running condition and are not being restored.

4 "Auto detail shop" includes any or all of the following uses: (a) shampoo and cleaning of carpet and seats; (b) complete interior cleaning; (c) clean and vacuum trunks; (d) cleaning and treatment of vinyl and rubber surfaces; (e) machine buffing and waxing of exterior and chrome; (f) hand wash exterior; (g) clean and polish tires and wheels; (h) engine and compartment cleaning; and (i) decal and paint striping.

"Base flood" or "100-year flood" means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

"Bikeway" means a paved, dedicated path or lane for use by cyclists.

"Cannabinoid" means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

"Cannabinoid concentrate" means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by mechanical extraction; chemical extraction using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol, or ethanol; chemical extraction using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, provided that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

"Cannabinoid edible" means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract, or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated.

"Cannabinoid extract" means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by chemical extraction using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane; a chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or any other process identified by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, in consultation with the Oregon Health Authority, by rule.

"Cannabinoid product" means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. Cannabinoid product does not include usable marijuana by itself, a cannabinoid concentrate by itself, a cannabinoid extract by itself, or industrial hemp by itself as defined in ORS 571.300.

“Cannabis” means the plant Cannabis itself, encompassing all its parts and products produced thereof, regardless of their THC content, including those with high and low THC content.

"Caretaker/manager residence" means a residence, secondary to the main use of the property, for the sole purpose of providing living quarters for the owner, operator, or caretaker of an ongoing commercial or industrial enterprise.

“Childcare facility” as used in EMC Title 16 is defined in ORS 329A:

1 “Large childcare facility" means any child care facility licensed to care for more than sixteen (16) children at a given time.

2 “Small childcare facility" means any child care facility licensed to care for a maximum of sixteen (16) children at a given time.

"Church" means a building, together with its accessory building or uses, where persons regularly assemble for worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, and which meets tax exemption status as prescribed in ORS Chapter 307.

"Clear vision area" means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two public rights-of-way, a street and a railroad, or private street and a public right-of-way, two sides of which are lines measured from the corner intersection to a distance of fifteen (15) feet. The third side of a triangle is a line across the corner of the lot connecting the lines of the other two sides. The clear vision area contains no signs or other obstructions higher than two and a half feet or lower than eight feet measured from the grade of the street centerline, though a single pole having a diameter of eighteen (18) inches or less is permitted.

"Clinic" means a building utilized by persons licensed in the state of Oregon to treat or analyze medical, dental, or surgical needs of humans or animals on an outpatient basis, excluding marijuana dispensing facilities as defined in EMC 16.65.020.

"Commercial use" means the activity of purchasing or selling, other than included in the term light and heavy "industry" as defined in the appropriate sections, article, substance, commodity, or service for livelihood or profit.

"Common property" means a parcel of land, together with improvements that are to be used, maintained and enjoyed by the owners and occupants of the individual building units or sites in subdivisions with common open space, planned development or planned unit subdivisions.

"Commonwall dwelling" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Community center" means a facility owned and operated by a governmental agency or a nonprofit community organization; provided that the primary purpose of the facility is for recreation, social welfare, community improvement, or public assembly.

“Community park” means a park that is intended for use by the entire city, can accommodate a higher level of use than neighborhood parks, and offers facilities that create a community-wide draw.

"Compact parking space" means a parking space measuring between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) feet by eight (8) feet, exclusive of maneuvering and access area, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile, connected with a street or alley which affords access for automobiles.

"Comprehensive plan" means the adopted comprehensive plan for Estacada as defined in ORS Chapter 197.

“Conical surface” (airport) means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.

"Cottage cluster" means a grouping of no fewer than three detached dwelling units on the same lot of record, with each dwelling unit having a footprint of less than 900 square feet, all dwellings sharing a common area on the lot of record, and internal ADA-compliant pathways connecting each dwelling to common space, vehicle parking, and sidewalks.

"Data center" means a facility used primarily for the storage, management, processing, and transmission of digital data, which houses computer and/or network equipment, systems, servers, appliances, and/or other associated components related to digital operations.

"Deck" means an attached or unattached structure accessory to the main use of the property, having no components necessary to the structural support of the main use.

"Density" means the number of dwelling units allowed within a specified land area.

"Development" means any manmade change or improvement involving buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, partitioning or subdividing.

"Discount store" means a retail sales use with a floor area less than 12,000 square feet that offers for sale a combination and variety of convenience shopping goods and consumer shopping goods; and continuously offers a majority of the items in their inventory for sale at a price less than ten dollars ($10.00) per item.

"Duplex" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for residential occupancy.

1 "Commonwall dwelling" means a dwelling on its own lot which shares at least one wall, or portion thereof, with another dwelling on an abutting lot.

2 "Duplex" means a single building on its own lot, with two dwelling units with separate housekeeping facilities. A single-family dwelling with an accessory suite is not a duplex.

3 "Factory-built dwelling", "modular dwelling", and "modular home" mean a dwelling that meets Oregon Building Code requirements for a residential dwelling, was constructed almost entirely off-site, was delivered to its permanent site in whole or in sections, and is set on to a foundation at that site; it does not mean a manufactured dwelling or mobile home, as defined separately in this Section. "Factory-built dwellings", "modular dwellings", and "modular homes" are considered "single-family dwellings."

4 "Fourplex" means a single building on its own lot with four dwelling units that are not accessory suites and that have separate housekeeping facilities.

5 "Manufactured dwelling" means a detached dwelling designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of only one family, constructed for movement on highways and includes the following:

1 "Manufactured home" means a manufactured dwelling constructed after June 15, 1976 in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect at the time of construction.

2 "Mobile home" means a manufactured dwelling constructed between January 1, 1926 and June 15, 1976, in accordance with the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

3 "Residential trailer" means a manufactured dwelling constructed before January 1, 1962, which was not constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code), nor the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law.

6 "Middle housing" means a category of housing types that includes duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, commonwall dwellings, and cottage clusters.

7 "Multi-family dwelling" means a single building, or a portion thereof, on its own lot, that contains five or more dwelling units, each with housekeeping facilities for just one family.

8 "Single-family dwelling" and "single family home" mean a detached dwelling unit on its own lot designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of only one family and having housekeeping facilities for only one family. "Factory-built dwellings", "modular dwellings", and "modular homes" are considered "single-family dwellings".

9 "Triplex" means a single building on its own lot with three dwelling units that are not accessory suites and that have separate housekeeping facilities.

"Dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof with one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes which provides a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of floor area per resident.

"Easement" means a right of use over the property of another.

"Enclosed" means activities which take place entirely within a structure or building, excluding parking and off-loading facilities.

"Factory-built dwelling" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Family" means any one of the following groups when living together in a single dwelling unit:

1 Persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianships, plus not more than six additional persons, including foster and shelter care children;

2 Up to six unrelated persons; or

3 Members of a "residential home," as defined in this chapter.

Each additional group described above, or portion thereof, shall be considered a separate family.

"Fence" means an accessory structure, including landscape planting, designed and intended to serve as a barrier or as a means of enclosing a yard or other area, or other structure, or to serve as a boundary feature separating two or more properties.

Fence, Sight-Obscuring. "Sight-obscuring fence" consists of either a continuous fence, wall, slated cyclone fence, evergreen planting, or combination thereof, constructed and/or planted so as to effectively screen the particular use from view. Fences described above are subject to clear vision regulations of EMC 16.60.010.

"FIRM" means flood insurance rate maps that delineate both the area of special flood hazard and risk premium zones.

"Flag lot" means a lot, the major portion of which has access to a road or street by means of a narrow strip of land called the "staff." The staff shall have a minimum width and frontage of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The staff portion of a flag lot shall not be used in computing lot size for zoning and building purposes.

"Flood/flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1 The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

2 The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source.

"Floodplain" means the area shown on designated maps for the city as being subject to inundation by delineation of a base flood as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other means.

“Food cart” means a vehicle that is used in selling and dispensing food or beverage to a customer and is not permanently affixed to the ground. As used in this definition, a vehicle is motorized or non-motorized transportation equipment containing an axle and capable of use on public roads, including, but not limited to, a car, van, pickup, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, bus, truck, detached trailer, or a truck tractor with no more than one trailer.

"Fourplex" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Greenbelt" means a designated area of undeveloped land and/or open space surrounding an urban community.

"Greenhouse" means a structure with transparent or translucent vertical walls. A transparent or translucent roof does not constitute a greenhouse.

"Greenway" means a linear strip of undeveloped land and/or open space converted to recreational use.

"Heavy industry" means the manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging or assembling of products, the process of which requires that permits be issued by the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality for the associated emissions, discharges, or storage of materials.

“Height” means the highest point of a structure or tree, plant or other object of natural growth, measured from above mean sea level (AMSL) or above ground level (AGL).

"Home occupation" means an occupation carried on within a dwelling, or an accessory structure by a resident of the dwelling, where such occupation is secondary to the main use of the property as a residence, but excluding commercial businesses considered by the planning commission as inappropriate for residential areas.

"Hoophouse" means any non-rigid, transparent, or translucent structure. Hoophouses are often constructed of PVC pipe and polyethylene, and are formed as a tunnel in structure.

“Horizontal surface” (airport) means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway of each airport and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc is 5,000 feet.

"Housekeeping facility" means a kitchen, laundry room, or similar space used for household-wide domestic duties.

"Hospital" means an establishment which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving medical, obstetrical, or surgical care with nursing service on a continuous basis.

"Hotel" means a building that is designed or used to offer short-term lodging for compensation, with or without meals, for five or more people. A facility that is operated for the purpose of providing care beyond that of room and board is not a "hotel."

"Industrial trade school" means a public or private school for teaching one or more industrial trades, vocations, and/or skills to meet industrial needs. These facilities may be referred to as technical schools, vocational schools, and career schools. Industrial trade schools provide training in such occupational skills as welding, operation and repair of industrial machinery, and truck driving.

"Junk yard" means any property utilized for breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap waste material, junk, or used equipment of any nature.

"Kennel" means a lot or building which provides for the keeping of four or more dogs, cats or animals at least six months of age, where such animals are kept for purposes other than a veterinary clinic.

"Landscaping" means a compatible combination of vegetation and materials which provide visual enhancement to a development.

"Landscaping plan" means a schematic or plot plan which indicates:

1 Areas of landscaping, including percent of lot area;

2 Type(s) of vegetation and;

3 Maintenance type and schedule, i.e., irrigation method.

"Light industry" means the manufacturing, processing, compounding, packaging or assembling of products, the process of which does not require that permits be issued by the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality for the associated emissions, discharges, or storage of materials.

"Livestock" means domestic animals and fowl or types customarily raised or kept on farms for profit or other purposes. This definition does not include domesticated household pets such as dogs or cats.

"Loading space" means an off-street space or berth on the same lot or parcel with a building or use, or contiguous to a group of buildings or uses, for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading persons, merchandise, or materials, and which abuts a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access.

"Lot" means a parcel or tract of land which is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or a use, together with yards and other open space and meets the definition of "lot of record."

"Lot area" means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of streets. The staff portion of a flag lot shall not be used in computing the size or area of the lot for zoning or building purposes.

Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot abutting on two or more streets, excluding alleys at their intersection. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets is a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.

"Lot depth" means the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear line.

"Lot frontage" means the front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining setback requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to a street other than an alley shall be considered frontage, and setbacks shall be provided as indicated in this section.

Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.

"Lot line" means the property line bounding a lot. See also “Property line”.

Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means the property line separating the lot from the street, other than an alley. In the case of a corner lot, the shortest property line along a street, other than an alley; or, in a case where the lot does not front directly upon a public street, that lot line toward which most houses in the immediate area face.

Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means the lot line or lines opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means any lot line or lines not a front or rear lot line.

"Lot of record" means any unit of land created as follows:

1 A lot in a platted subdivision;

2 A lot created by land partitioning;

3 A unit of land described by a conveyed deed or land sales contract established prior to requirements for partitions and which conformed with all zoning requirements in effect, if any, when the deed or contract creating the lot was recorded.

Lot of Record, Nonconforming. "Nonconforming lot of record" means a parcel of land which lawfully existed as a lot in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time of creation, but which, because of the application of a subsequent zoning ordinance, no longer conforms to the lot dimension requirement for the zoning district in which it is located.

Lot, Through. "Through lot" means an interior lot abutting on streets, other than an alley, on both of the opposite, exterior lot lines.

"Lot width" means the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line.

"Manager/caretaker residence" means a residence, secondary to the main use of the property, for the sole purpose of providing living quarters for the owner, operator or caretaker of an ongoing commercial or industrial enterprise.

"Manufactured dwelling" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Manufactured dwelling park" means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land under the same ownership divided into four or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or lease.

"Marijuana" means the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae, and the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp as defined in ORS 571.300.

"Marijuana processing" means the processing, compounding, or conversion of marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates, or cannabinoid extracts, provided that the marijuana processor is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

"Marijuana production" means the manufacture, planting, cultivation, growing, trimming, harvesting, or drying of marijuana, provided that the marijuana producer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority and a person designated to produce marijuana by a registry identification cardholder.

"Marijuana retailing" means the sale of marijuana items to a consumer, provided that the marijuana retailer is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered with the Oregon Health Authority.

"Marijuana wholesaling" means the purchase of marijuana items for resale to a person other than a consumer, provided that the marijuana wholesaler is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

"Marina" means a commercial boat launch, moorage or similar facility which may include dry or wet boat storage, boat houses and related commercial activities.

"Mini-warehouse (storage)" means a structure used for storing personal effects or small retail merchandise with individual compartments that do not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.

"Mobile home" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Modular dwelling" and "modular home" are defined under "Dwelling".

"Motel" means a building or series of buildings in which lodging only is offered for compensation and which may have more than five sleeping rooms or units for this purpose and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of providing direct independent access to and adjoining parking for each rental unit designed primarily for automobile tourists and transient persons. The term includes auto courts, tourist courts, tourist homes and motor lodges.

"Multi-family dwelling" is defined under "Dwelling".

“Neighborhood park” means a park that provides close-to-home recreation opportunities, and provides both active and passive recreation opportunities for people living within approximately one-half mile walking distance of the park.

"Nonconforming structure/use" means use of structure or land, or structure and land in combination which was lawfully established in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws, but which because of the application of a subsequent zoning ordinance:

1 No longer conforms to the setback, height, maximum lot coverage or other building development requirements of this title; or

2 Is clearly designed and intended for uses other than any use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.

“Obstruction” (airport) means any structure or tree, plant or other object of natural growth that penetrates an imaginary surface.

"Open space" means land area to be used by residents and/or the general public for scenic, landscaping or open recreation purposes within a development. Open space may include areas of undisturbed vegetation, steep slopes, stream corridors, wetlands, wildlife habitat areas or areas replanted with native vegetation after construction, and/or greenways. Open space does not include street right-of-way, driveways or open parking areas.

“Other than utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by turbine-driven aircraft or by propeller-driven aircraft exceeding 12,500 pounds gross weight.

"Owner" means the owner of a record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or a person who is purchasing a parcel of property under contract.

"Parcel" means a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

"Park" means an open or enclosed tract of land set apart and devoted for the purposes of pleasure, recreation, ornament, light and air for the general public.

"Parking space" means an off-street enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area of not less than eighteen (18) feet by eight (8) feet, exclusive of maneuvering and access area, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile, connected with a street or alley which affords access for automobiles.

"Partition" means either an act of partitioning land or an area or tract of land partitioned as defined in ORS Chapter 92. "Partition land" means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exist as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year, and does not include exceptions as outlined in ORS 92.010(7).

"Partition plat" means a final map and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, provisions and information concerning a partition.

“Pedestrian amenities” means areas and objects that serve as places for public socializing and enjoyment and are usually closed to motorized vehicles. Sidewalks designed to meet minimum sidewalk width standards are not considered pedestrian amenities, for the purpose of this code. Pedestrian amenities include the following:

1 A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk (building frontage areas) next to the building entrance. Extra-wide sidewalks shall be at least three (3) feet wider than the minimum required for the purpose of this Section;

2 Sitting space (e.g., dining area, benches, garden wall or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk) with a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width;

3 Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture);

4 Transit amenity, such as bus shelter, per the standards of the transit service provider, as applicable;

5 Sidewalk chalk squares;

6 Planters;

7 Covered entryway with seating;

8 Streetscape furnishings, including pedestrian level street lighting, bike racks, crosswalks, bollards, trash cans, drinking fountains, tree gates, and curb extensions; or

9 Street trees.

"Performance agreement" means a bond executed by a surety company licensed in the state of Oregon, or other security acceptable to the city, to ensure completion of the conditions of approval.

"Person" means a natural person, the heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or a firm, partnership or corporation, successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid, or any political subdivisions, agency, board or bureau of the state.

"Planned development" means a development in which the applicable code restrictions, other density requirements, may be modified and/or applied to the development as a whole rather than to each individual lot. A planned development involving the subdividing of property is a planned unit development.

"Planned unit subdivision" means a subdivision of land in which the individual building sites may be reduced in size but are compensated by area used in common for recreational or other open space purposes. Planned unit subdivisions involving dwelling or commercial units may incorporate detached, semi-detached, attached, single-story or multistoried units or any combination of the aforementioned. Such projects may also involve religious, cultural, recreational and commercial uses and purposes.

"Plat" means a final subdivision plat, re-plat or partition plat.

“Primary surface” (airport) means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When a runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. When a runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is:

1 250 feet for utility runways.

2 500 feet for other than utility runways.

"Principal use" means the intended and primary use of a structure or parcel of land.

"Property line" means the line denoting the limits of legal ownership of property. See also “Lot line”.

“Psilocybin” means a naturally occurring psychedelic compound occurring in certain mushroom species, as defined by the Oregon Health Authority.

“Psilocybin processing” means the processing, compounding, or conversion of psilocybin into products, concentrates, or extracts.

“Psilocybin production” means the manufacture, extracting, planting, cultivation, growing, trimming, harvesting, or drying of psilocybin.

"Psilocybin retailing" means the sale of psilocybin items to a consumer.

“Psilocybin service center” refers to a location where preparation, administration, and/or integration sessions involving psilocybin occurs.

"Public utility" means any corporation, company, individual, association of individuals, or its lessees, trustees or receivers, that owns, operates, manages or controls all or any part of any plant or equipment for the conveyance of telegraph, telephone, with or without wires, for the transportation as common carriers, or for the production, transmission, delivery or furnishing of heat, light, water, power or cable services, directly or indirectly to the public.

"Public utility workshop" means a building used for the repair and/or maintenance of utility vehicles, machinery or other equipment.

"Recreational vehicle (R.V.)" vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for human occupancy and as further defined, by rule, by the Director of Transportation, at OAR 735-022-0140.

"Recreational vehicle park" shall have the meaning set forth in OAR 918-650-0005.

"Remuneration" means compensation, money, rent or other bargained for consideration given in return for occupancy, possession or use of real property.

"Re-plat" means the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a re-configuration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.

"Residential care facility" ("RCF") means a building, complex, or distinct part thereof, consisting of shared or individual living units in a homelike surrounding, where six or more seniors and/or adult individuals with disabilities may reside. A residential care facility is licensed to operate as such by the State of Oregon. It offers and coordinates a range of supportive serves available on a 24-hour basis to meet the activities of daily living, health, and social needs of the residents. A program approach is used to promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, individuality, and independence.

"Residential home" means any dwelling unit or residential building operated as a single housekeeping unit for the purpose of providing food, shelter, personal services and care, as defined in the ordinance codified in this chapter, and when appropriate, a planned treatment or training program of counseling, therapy, or other rehabilitative social service, for persons of similar or compatible conditions of circumstances.

"Road" means a public or private way created to provide ingress to, or egress from, one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, or that provides for travel between places by vehicles. The terms "street", "access drive" and "highway" for the purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be synonymous with the term "road."

1 "Arterial" means a street designed to carry traffic from one community to another, to carry traffic to and from major traffic generators and to carry through traffic.

2 "Collector or secondary street" means a street designed to carry traffic between minor streets and the arterial system, to function as primary traffic carries within a neighborhood, to carry traffic to local traffic generators, and in commercial and industrial areas, This street classification includes Major and Minor collectors.
to provide access to commercial and industrial properties.

3 "Cul-de-sac" or "dead end street" means a minor street with only one outlet which provides a vehicular turnaround.

4 "Local street" means a street designed to provide access to abutting residential property with only incidental service to through traffic. This street classification includes Local and Neighborhood Local streets.

5 "Private road" means a private way created by deed or easement to provide vehicular ingress to, or egress from, three to six lots or parcels. Any road serving more than six dwelling units must be a public road. Private roads may serve development when approved by the planning commission upon written findings that such roads are of adequate width, alignment, grade and length to afford the same degree of public safety as public roads and that extension of the public road system is impractical. In determining if the extension of the public road system is impractical, the planning commission shall consider criteria including, but not limited to, lot size or shape, topography, the location of existing structures. In no case shall a private street be less than twenty (20) feet in width. Greater width may be required where necessary to provide for public safety, accommodate traffic volume, or provide for underground utilities. A street maintenance agreement approved by the city and duly recorded, shall be required for the creation of any private road.

6 "Public road" means a road dedicated for public use.

7 "Access drive" means a private road, with a travel surface not less than twelve (12) feet in width, created by deed or easement to provide vehicular ingress, or egress from not more than two lots or parcels.

“Runway” means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. “Runway protection zone (RPZ)” means an area off the runway end used to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground. The RPZ is trapezoidal in shape and centered about the extended runway centerline. The inner width of Valley View Airport’s RPZ is the same as the width of its primary surface, or 250 feet. The outer width of its RPZ is 700 feet. The RPZ extends from each end of the primary surface for a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet.

"School" means any institution for learning, whether public or private, meeting state of Oregon accreditation standards.

"Self-storage facility" means a facility with containers, garages, lockers, rooms, warehouses, or other secured spaces rented to tenants for storage.

"Setback" means the horizontal distance measured perpendicular from the lot line to the nearest point of any structure on the lot or parcel.

1 Front: a setback between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front line from the front lot line to the nearest point of a building. Any yard meeting this definition and abutting on a street other than an alley, shall be considered a front yard.

2 Rear: a setback between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line, to the rear most part of the main building.

3 Side: a setback between the front and rear lot lines, measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building.

"Short-term rental" means the use of a dwelling unit by any person or group of persons who occupies or is entitled to occupy a dwelling unit for remuneration for a period of time of less than thirty (30) days.

"Sign" means an identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure or land, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.

Street. (See "Road.")

"Single family dwelling" and "single family home" are defined under "Dwelling".

"Structure" means anything constructed, built, or installed, which requires a location on the ground or is attached to another structure having a location on the ground.

"Subdivide land" means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such an area or tract of land exists as a unit of contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of a year.

"Subdivision" means an area or tract of land divided into four or more lots within a calendar year.

"Subdivision plat" includes a final map and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision.

"Temporary" means a specific period of time.

"Tentative plan" means an approved diagram showing the design of a proposed partition or subdivision, together with any other pertinent writing and information.

“Transitional surface” means those surfaces that extend upward and outward at ninety (90) degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to the point of intersection with the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at a ninety (90) degree angle to the extended runway centerline.

"Triplex" is defined under "Dwelling".

"Unit of ownership" means an area or tract of land described by a deed or by metes and bounds as a single entity.

"Use" means the purpose for which a structure is designed, arranged or intended; or for which land is maintained, occupied or zoned.

“Utility runway” means a runway that is constructed for, and intended to be used by, propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.

“Visual runway” means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures, where no straight-in instrument approach procedures or instrument designations have been approved or planned, or are indicated on a Federal Aviation Administration-approved airport layout plan or any other FAA planning document.

"Water-dependent" means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for water-borne transportation, recreation, energy production, or source of water.

“Water impoundment” (airport) means a water feature including wastewater treatment settling ponds, surface mining ponds, detention and retention ponds, artificial lakes and ponds, and similar water features. A new water impoundment includes an expansion of an existing water impoundment except where such expansion was previously authorized by land use action approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

"Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration that are sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence or vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.

"Wholly enclosed" means completely located within a building.

“Youth support services facility”:

1 Means any school, agency, organization or program providing:

1 Day treatment for children with emotional disturbances;

2 Adoption placement services;

3 Residential care, including but not limited to foster care or residential treatment for children;

4 Residential care in combination with academic education and therapeutic care, including but not limited to treatment for emotional, behavioral or mental health disturbances;

5 Outdoor youth programs;

6 Other similar care or services for children;

7 A shelter-care home that is not a foster home subject to ORS 418.625 to 418.645;

8 An independent residence facility as described in ORS 418.475 that meets the standards established by the Department of Human Services by rule to be considered a child-caring agency;

9 A private residential boarding school;

10 A child-caring facility as defined in ORS 418.950;

11 A secure transportation services provider that transports or provides escort services for children on the highways of this state along a route that begins or ends in this state to or from a school, agency, organization or program described in subparagraph A. of this paragraph, if the school, agency, organization or program is located in this state or in any other state.

2 Does not include the following:

1 A facility that exclusively serves individuals 18 years of age and older; or

2 A facility that primarily serves both adults and children but requires that any child must be accompanied at all times by at least one custodial parent or guardian.

(Ord. 2007-6 § 1; Ord. 2004-2 § 1; Ord. 2003-8 § 1; Ord. 2000-25 §§ 2, 3; editorially amended during 2000 codification; prior code § 10.202) (Ord. No. 2015-003, § 2, 4-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-003, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016; Ord. No. 2016-005, § 1, 8-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-006, § 1, 11-13-2017; Ord. No. 2018-001, § 1, 6-11-2018; Ord. No. 2018-002, § 1, 8-13-2018)

HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 2019-005 on 3/9/2020
Amended by Ord. 2022-010 on 12/12/2022
Amended by Ord. 2023-003 on 5/22/2023
Amended by Ord. 2023-007 on 1/8/2024
Amended by Ord. 2023-008 on 1/8/2024
Adopted by Ord. 2024-005 on 10/14/2024
Amended by Ord. 2024-005 on 10/14/2024
Amended by Ord. 2025-001 on 3/10/2025
Amended by Ord. 2025-004 on 10/27/2025
Amended by Ord. 2025-008 on 11/10/2025
Amended by Ord. 2025-013 on 1/26/2026
