Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions
33.910 Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                     910

Sections:
          33.910.010                          Defining Words
          33.910.020                           Use of Terms
          33.910.030                          Definitions
33.910.010 Defining Words
Words used in the zoning code have their normal dictionary meaning unless they are listed in
33.910.030 below. Words listed in 33.910.030 have the specific meaning stated, unless the context
clearly indicates another meaning.

33.910.020 Use of Terms
Information about the use of terms in the zoning code is contained in 33.700.070.D.

33.910.030 Definitions
The definition of words with specific meaning in the zoning code are as follows:
Accessible Route. A route that can be used by a disabled person using a wheelchair and that is also
safe for and usable by people with other disabilities.
Accessory Dwelling Unit. See Residential Structure Types.
Accessory Parking Facility. A parking facility that provides parking for a specific use or uses. The
facility may be located on or off the site of the use or uses to which it is accessory. A fee may or may
not be charged. An accessory parking facility need not be in the same ownership as the specific uses
to which it is accessory. See also Commercial Parking in Chapter 33.920, Descriptions of Use
Categories.
Accessory Recreational Vehicle. See Recreational Vehicle, under Vehicle Types.
Accessory Structure. A structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the
primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures may be
attached or detached from the primary structure.  Examples of accessory structures include: garages,
decks, fences, trellises, flag poles, stairways, heat pumps, awnings, and other structures. See also
Primary Structure.
Accessory Use. A use or activity which is a subordinate part of a primary use and which is clearly
incidental to a primary use on a site.
Adjusted Lot. See Lot-Related Definitions
Airport Airside Development. Airside development occurs at the Portland International Airport
within the Perimeter Security Fence and the Runway Protection Zone.   Examples include runways,
taxiways, airfield roadways, aviation approach lighting systems, navigational beacons, associated
equipment sheds, and security fencing.
Airport Landside Development. Landside development occurs at the Portland International Airport
outside the Perimeter Security Fence.  This area is comprised of the Passenger Terminal, airport
access roadways, parking lots, aircraft maintenance facilities, cargo hangers, maintenance buildings,
fire and rescue facilities, and other similar types of development.

                                                                                                                          910-                                                            1
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Alley. A right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common parking area. Generally, alleys
provide secondary vehicle access; however, where vehicle access from the street is not allowed or
not possible, the alley may provide primary vehicle access. See also Street-Types.
Alteration. See Development, Alteration.
Alternative or Post Incarceration Facility. A Group Living use where the residents are on probation
or parole.
Applicant. A person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the
owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner, such as a builder, developer,
optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.
Arborist. A professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist.
Arterial. See Street Types.
Attached Duplex. See Residential Structure Types.
Attached House. See Residential Structure Types.
Attached Structure. Any structure that is attached to a primary structure by a common wall or
shares a common floor/ceiling. For example, a garage is an attached structure when it shares a
common wall with a primary dwelling unit. Structures that are attached solely by elements other
than a common wall or floor/ceiling are not considered attached. See Connected Structure.
Auto-Accommodating Development. See Development Types.
Aviation, General. General aviation refers to all flights other than military and scheduled airline and
cargo flights, both private and commercial. Examples include business aviation, private flying, flight
training, air ambulance, police aircraft, aerial firefighting, and air charter services.
Basement. The portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade. A minimum of 50
percent of the total combined area of the basement walls must be below grade to be considered a
basement. Only one basement level may be partly below grade; additional basement levels must be
completely below grade.
Block.              All of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way, and water features, but is not divided
or separated in any way by streets, rights-of-way, or water features.
Block Frontage. All of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or
intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature, or end of a dead end street.    An
intercepting street determines only the boundary of the block frontage on the side of the street
which it intercepts. See Figure 910-1.

                                                                                                                           910-                                                            2
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         1
                                                                                                                                                                               Block Frontage

Building. A structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides.
Building Coverage.  The area that is covered by buildings or other roofed structures.  A roofed
structure includes any structure more than 6 feet above grade at any point, and that provides an
impervious cover over what is below. Building coverage also includes uncovered horizontal
structures such as decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than 6 feet above grade. Eaves
that are 2 feet or less in depth are not included in building coverage. Eaves that are greater than 2
feet in depth are included in building coverage.
Building Line.  A line running parallel to a lot line, that is the same distance from the lot line as the
closest portion of a building on the site. See Figure 910-2.

                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                 Building Lines

Bus Stop. A location where regularly scheduled bus service or streetcar service stops to load and
unload passengers. For purposes of measuring, the bus stop is the location of a sign denoting the
bus stop.

                                                                                                                                                                                                    910-                                                            3
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Calendar Year is the year from January 1 through December 31.
Caretaker. A caretaker looks after or provides security for goods or property.
Carpool. At least two people sharing a vehicle at least four days per week, generally for the purpose
of commuting to work.
Cemetery. An open space site for burial, entombment, inurnment, interment, cremation, or funeral
purposes.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of inspection issued by PP&D at
the completion of a building permit or change of occupancy.
Change of Use. Change of the primary type of activity on a site. For example, in the Retail Sales and
Service use category, a change from a restaurant to a bank would be considered a change in the
primary type of activity; a change from a restaurant to a restaurant would not be considered a
change in the primary type of activity.
City. The City of Portland, Oregon.
City-Designated Natural Resources. Natural resources and functional values protected by
Environmental Overlay Zones.
Clearing. Any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of
the site.
Combined Flood Hazard Area. The farthest extent of the land area comprised of the Special Flood
Hazard Area, the Modeled Willamette River 1996 Flood Extent and, for areas not included in the
Modeled Willamette River 1996 Flood Extent, the 1996 Flood Inundation Area.
Common Green. See Street Types.
Community Garden. A site where any kind of plant, including flowers, is grown, and several
individuals or households cultivate the site. The site may be divided into individual allotments, or
gardeners may work together to cultivate the entire property.  The land may be publicly or privately
owned. The plants are grown for personal use by the gardeners, or for donation, and only limited
sales are allowed.
Comprehensive Plan. The current adopted, acknowledged, and effective Comprehensive Plan of the
City of Portland.
Congregate Housing Facility. See Residential Structure Types.
Connected Structure. Any structure that is connected to a primary structure by a roof, a deck or by
other structural connections, and which does not share a common wall, ceiling or floor. For
example, decks or stairways are connected structures when they are fastened to a primary
structure. A garage that is connected to a primary structure by a roofed structure such as a
breezeway, and does not share a common wall with the primary structure, is a connected accessory
structure. See Attached Structure.
Conservation Landmark. See Historic Resource.
Contributing Resource. See Historic Resource.
Corner Lot. See Lot-Related Definitions.

                                                                                                                     910-                                                            4
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Courtyard. An outdoor area, designed for use by pedestrians, surrounded on at least two sides by
buildings and open on at least one side to an abutting right-of-way.
Council. The City Council of Portland, Oregon.
Crown Cover. The area directly beneath the crown and within the dripline of a tree or shrub. The
crown consists of the above ground branches, stems, and leaves.
Days. Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays as identified in Section 4.16.080 of Title 4, Personnel.
Delivery Days.              Days when deliveries of food or other goods are made to Food Membership
Distribution Sites for later pick-up by members of Food Buying Clubs or Community Supported
Agriculture Organizations.
Dead-                         End Street. See Street Types.
Density. A measurement of the number of people, dwelling units, or lots in relationship to a
specified amount of land. Density is a measurement used generally for residential uses. See Chapter
33.205, Accessory Dwelling Units for how density is calculated for ADUs. See also Intensity.
Design Guidelines.  A set of design parameters for development which apply within a design district,
subdistrict, or overlay zone. The guidelines are adopted public statements of intent and are used to
evaluate the acceptability of a project's design.
Desired Character. The preferred and envisioned character (usually of an area) based on the
purpose statement or character statement of the base zone, overlay zone, or plan district.   It also
includes the preferred and envisioned character based on any adopted area plans or design
guidelines for an area.
Develop. To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including
excavations and fills.
Developed Portion of Right-of-way. Those portions of a right-of-way that contain development,
including retaining walls or other structures, vehicle travel lanes, parking and loading areas, curbs,
landscape strips, sidewalks, shoulders, other paved or graveled areas, and other areas used for
bicycle or pedestrian traffic. It does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land.
Development. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading
areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or
activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not
include natural geologic forms or unimproved land. See also Exterior Improvements.
Development, Alteration. A physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include
normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Alteration does include the following:
         •                                              Changes to the facade of a building;
         •                                            Changes to the interior of a building;
         •                                            Increases or decreases in gross            building                       area;
         •                                            Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;
         •                                            Changes to exterior improvements;
         •                                            Changes to landscaping; and
         •                                            Changes in the topography of the site.

                                                                                                                      910-                                                            5
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Development, Exterior Alteration. A physical change to a site that is outside of any buildings.
Exterior alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Exterior
alteration does include the following:
         •                                              Changes to the facade of a building;
         •                                            Increases or decreases in gross building area that result in changes to the exterior of a
                   building;
         •                                            Changes to other structures on the site or the development of new structures;
         •                                            Changes to exterior improvements;
         •                                            Changes to landscaping; and
         •                                            Changes in the topography of the site.

Development, New. Development of a site that was previously unimproved or that has had
previously existing buildings demolished.
Development Types
         •                                            Auto-Accommodating Development. Development which is designed to accommodate
                   customers who use autos to travel to the site. Buildings feature entrances providing
                   convenient access to parking areas. In many cases, the building will have parking between
                   secondary streets and the building. Other typical characteristics are drive-through facilities,
                   more than one driveway, and a low percentage of the site covered by buildings. Auto-
                   accommodating development along transit streets and in pedestrian districts typically
                   include a mix of auto-accommodating and pedestrian-oriented characteristics.
                   See also Pedestrian-Oriented Development.
         •                                            Pedestrian-                         Oriented Development. Development which is designed with an emphasis
                   primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather
                   than on auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street
                   and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk.  There are generally windows or
                   display cases along building facades which face the street. Typically, buildings cover a large
                   portion of the site. Although parking areas may be provided, they are generally limited in
                   size and they are not emphasized by the design of the site.
                   See also Auto-Accommodating Development.

Director of PP&D         . The Director of the City of Portland Permitting & Development          , or the Director's
designee.
Disabled Person. For the purposes of Chapter 33.229, Elderly and Disabled High Density Housing, a
disabled person is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially
limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of
1973 and state law.
Disturbance. An action that causes an alteration to soil or vegetation. The action may create
temporary or permanent disturbance. Examples include development, exterior alterations, exterior
improvements, demolition and removal of structures and paved areas, cutting, clearing, damaging,
or removing native vegetation.
Disturbance Area. The area where all temporary and permanent disturbance occurs. For new
development the disturbance area must be contiguous.  Native vegetation planted for resource
enhancement, mitigation, remediation, and agricultural and pasture lands is not included. The

                                                                                                                     910-                                                            6
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

disturbance area may contain two subareas, the permanent disturbance area and the temporary
disturbance area:
         •                                              Permanent Disturbance Area. The permanent disturbance area includes all areas occupied
                  by existing or proposed structures or exterior improvements.  The permanent disturbance
                  area also includes areas where vegetation must be managed to accommodate overhead
                  utilities, existing or proposed non-native planting areas, and roadside areas subject to
                  regular vegetation management to maintain safe visual or vehicle clearance.
         •                                            Temporary Disturbance Area. The temporary disturbance area is the portion of the site to
                  be disturbed for the proposed development but that will not be permanently occupied by
                  structures or exterior improvements. It includes staging and storage areas used during
                  construction and all areas graded to facilitate proposed development on the site, but that
                  will not be covered by permanent development.  It also includes areas disturbed during
                  construction to place underground utilities, where the land above the utility will not
                  otherwise be occupied by structures or exterior improvements.
Drainageway. A constructed or natural channel or depression, which at any time           collects                    and
conveys water. It may be permanently or temporarily inundated.
Drive-Through Facility. A facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their
vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities are a type of site
development that is usually found in conjunction with a Quick Vehicle Servicing use or a Retail Sales
And Service use. Drive-through facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of
vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually
either perform the service for themselves, or wait on the site for the service to be rendered.    Drive-
through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses.   Examples are
drive-up windows; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump and electric vehicle charging
islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield
washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters. Parking spaces used
for customer pick-up or loading of goods or products purchased on-site, on the phone, or on-line
from the establishment are not a drive-through facility. . Parking spaces that include electric vehicle
chargers and equipment are not a drive-through facility. Facilities designed for electric vehicle
charging or the picking-up or loading of goods or products purchased from the establishment that
include a stacking lane and a service area are a drive-through facility.
Driveway.              There are two types of driveways:
         •                                            The area that provides vehicular access to a site. A driveway begins at the property line and
                  extends into the site. A driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas
                  in parking areas, such as aisles; and
         •                                            The area that provides vehicular circulation between two or more noncontiguous parking
                  areas. A driveway does not include maneuvering or circulation areas within the interior of a
                  parking area. A driveway must be used exclusively for circulation, with no abutting parking
                  spaces. See Figure 910-13.

See also Parking Area and Vehicle Areas.

                                                                                                               910-                                                            7
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         13
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Driveway

Duplex. See Residential Structure Types.
Dwelling Unit.  See Residential Structure Types.
Easement. A grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner’s land for a
specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities.
Eave. Projecting overhang at the lower border of a roof and extending from a primary wall or
support. See Figure 910-14.

                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eave

Ecologically and Scientifically Significant Natural Areas. Land and water that has substantially
retained its natural character, but is not necessarily completely natural or undisturbed, and which is
significant for historical, scientific, paleontological, or natural features.
ESEE Analysis. A type of analysis which is used to help determine if a particular resource should be
protected in accordance with Statewide Planning Goal 5. The analysis examines competing values to

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        910-                                                            8
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

determine what the controlling value should be for the individual resource being examined. The
analysis considers economic, social, energy, and environmental values.
Excavating or Filling.  The removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and
similar nondecomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling
does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials
that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or
aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and
stockpiling.
Exchange Parcel. The area of land to be conveyed from one property to another through a Property
Line Adjustment. A single Property Line Adjustment may involve more than one exchange parcel.
See Property Line Adjustment.
Expedited Land Division. An Expedited Land Division is a division of land under ORS 92.010
(Definitions for ORS 92.010 to 92.192) to 92.192 (Property line adjustment), 92.205 (Policy) to
92.245 (Fees for review proceedings resulting in modification or vacation) or 92.830 (Definitions for
ORS 92.830 to 92.845) to 92.845 (Relationship of subdivision in manufactured dwelling park or
mobile home park to planned community statutes and series partition statutes) by a local
government that, unless it is a middle housing land division, meets all of the elements of ORS
197.360.
Exterior Alteration. See Development, Exterior Alteration                .
Exterior Display. Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and
machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and
compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different
products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Exterior
display does not include goods that are being stored or parked outside, if there is no variety or
distinction among the goods, and the goods are not examined and compared by customers. It does
not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and
materials, and other similar products. Exterior display does not include car and boat sales and
leasing when such vehicles are not accessible to customers to inspect and compare; this situation is
considered exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales
and leasing, and plant nurseries. See also, Exterior Work Activities and Exterior Storage.
Exterior Improvements. All improvements except buildings or other roofed structures. Exterior
improvements include surface parking and loading areas, paved and graveled areas, and areas
devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. It includes improved open areas such as plazas and
walkways, but does not include vegetative landscaping, synthetic turf, natural geologic forms, or
unimproved land. See also Development.
Exterior Storage. Exterior storage includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or
no differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type
that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage also includes the outdoor
storage of goods for sale, lease or rent that may be differentiated by type or model, but that are not
accessible for customers to inspect or compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or
finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing
materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; vehicles that are for sale, lease or rent,
which are not accessible to the customer to inspect or compare; vehicles that have been unloaded
at port facilities and are waiting transport to off-                            site locations; vehicles that have been towed and
are being kept in an impound lot; and other similar items. The storage of recreational vehicles

                                                                                                    910-                                                            9
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

outdoors is also considered exterior storage. Damaged or inoperable vehicles or vehicles which have
missing parts, that are kept outside, are also included as exterior storage. Examples of uses that
often have exterior storage are lumber yards, wrecking yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip
and gravel sales, car dealerships or car rental establishments, and port facilities. If goods are stored
inside a building that is not enclosed on 100 percent of the area of its sides, it is considered exterior
storage. See also, Exterior Display and Exterior Work Activities.
Exterior Work Activities.  Exterior work activities include the outdoor processing, assembly, or
fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other
similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include
normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor
recreation, or outdoor markets. See Exterior Display and Exterior Storage.
Facade. All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view. For example, the front
facade of a building would include all of the wall area that would be shown on the front elevation of
the building plans. For information on how to measure facades, see Chapter 33.930, Measurements.
Farmers Market. Farmers Markets are events where farmers, ranchers, and other agricultural
producers sell food, plants, flowers, and added-value products, such as jams and jellies, they have
grown, raised, or produced from products they have grown or raised. In addition, some vendors sell
food that is available for immediate consumption on site, and some may be community groups,
services, or other vendors or organizations. Farmers Markets occur on a regular basis in the same
location. They are free and open to the public. Some markets are seasonal, while others occur year-
round.
Final Plat. The diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations,
dedications, provisions and information concerning a land division.
Fish and Wildlife Habitat Areas. Lands which contain significant food, water, or cover for native
terrestrial and aquatic species of animals. Examples include forests, fields, riparian areas, wetlands,
and water bodies.
Flag Lot. See Lot-Related Definitions.
Floodway. The active flowing channel during a flood, as designated on the flood maps adopted
under authority of Title 24 of the Portland City Code. The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Floor Area. The total area of all floors                          of a building. Floor area is measured for each floor from the
exterior faces of a building or structure. Floor area includes stairwells, ramps, shafts, chases, and the
area devoted to garages and structured parking.                      Floor area does not include the following:

         •                                            Areas where the elevation of the floor is 4 feet or more below the adjacent right-                  of way;
         •                                            Basements;
         •                                            Areas where the ceiling height is less than 6 feet 8 inches. See Figure 910  -20;
         •                                            Roof area, including roof top parking;
         •                                            Roof top mechanical equipment; and
         •                                            Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls
                  that are more than 42 inches in height for 75 percent or more of their perimeter.

                                                                                                              910-                                                            10
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                           See also Net Building Area, Gross Building Area

                                                                                                                                                   Figure 910-                         20
                                                                                                                                                  Ceiling Height

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The amount of floor area in relation to the amount of site area, expressed in
square feet. For example, a floor area ratio of 2 to 1 means two square feet of floor area for every
one square foot of site area.
Food Membership Distribution Site. A site where items ordered through the following organizations
are picked up by the members.
             •                                            Food Buying Clubs are membership organizations. The members, as a group, buy food and
                           related products from wholesalers, distributors, growers, and others. All products are pre-
                           ordered and pre-paid, and at least 70 percent of the products are food.
             •                                            Community Supported Agriculture Organizations are membership organizations.
                           Individuals or households become members by purchasing a share or a specified amount of
                           an agricultural producer's output in advance. Members receive food items from the
                           producer on a regular schedule.

Fossil Fuel. Fossil fuels are petroleum products (such as crude oil and gasoline), coal, methanol, and
gaseous fuels (such as natural gas and propane) that are made from decayed plants and animals
that lived millions of years ago and are used as a source of energy. Petroleum-based products used
primarily for non-fuel uses (such as asphalt, plastics, lubricants, fertilizer, roofing, and paints) are not
fossil fuels. See Renewable Fuel.
Front Lot Line. See Lot Lines.
Front Setback. See Setback.

                                                                                                                                                                 910-                                                            11
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Functional Values. Functional values are the benefits provided by resources. The functional value
may be physical, aesthetic, scenic, educational, or some other nonphysical function, or a
combination of these. For example, two values of a wetland could be its ability to provide
stormwater detention for x units of water draining y acres, and its ability to provide food and shelter
for z varieties of migrating waterfowl. As another example, an unusual native species of plant in a
natural resource area could be of educational, heritage, and scientific value. Most natural resources
have many functional values.
Future Division Plan. A document that shows lot, tract and right-of-way boundaries for all future
phases of a land division. The plan is not binding on the City or the applicant. The purpose of the
plan is to document that the design of the first phase of the plan does not preclude future phases
from meeting the requirements of this and other Titles.
Garage. A covered structure that                                     is accessory to a use in a house, attached house, duplex, triplex,
fourplex, cottage cluster, manufactured dwelling, or houseboat, and that:
         •                                            Is designed to provide shelter for vehicles;
         •                                            Is connected to a right-of-way by a driveway; and
         •                                            Has an opening that is at least 8-feet wide.
Carports are considered garages. Floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for
vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-               to-ceiling walls, is considered part of
the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure. See also Structured
Parking.
Garage Entrance Setback. See Setback.
Grade. The final elevation of the ground.
Grading. All cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated
with development.
Gross Building Area.  The total area of all floors of a building, both above and below ground. Gross
building area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Gross building area
includes structured parking but does not include the following:
         •                                            Roof area;
         •                                            Roof top mechanical equipment; and
         •                                            Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls
                   that are more than 42 inches in height, for 75 percent or more of their perimeter.

Groundwater Sensitive Areas. Areas from which groundwater is replenished and the flow enables
contaminants to be carried into aquifers (aquifer recharge areas), or areas of an aquifer in which the
groundwater level and flow characteristics are influenced by the withdrawal of groundwater (areas
of influence).
Hazardous Substances. Any substance, material, or waste listed below:
         •                                            Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste;
         •                                            Chemicals listed in the            List of Lists: Chemicals Subject to the Emergency Planning and
                   Community Right-To-Know Act (EPCRA), Comprehensive Environmental Response,
                   Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) and Section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act, published
                   March 15, 2015, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                          , or as subsequently updated or
                   amended; and

                                                                                                                     910-                                                            12
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

           •                                            Hazardous Materials Table, in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101,
                      or as subsequently updated or amended.

Heavy Truck.               See Truck under Vehicle Types.
Helicopter Approach-                        Departure Flight Path. The approved route used by helicopters when
approaching or departing from a helicopter landing facility. In general, the helicopter approach-
departure flight path has dimensions as follows: 1) It is a trapezoid-shaped plane; 2) its inner width
is the same as the width of the landing pad and its outer width is 500 feet at a distance of 4,000 feet
from the landing pad; and 3) it has a slope of 1 (vertical) to 8 (horizontal). See Figure 910-3. See also,
FAA Heliport Design Guide for more detailed flight path standards and requirements.

                                                                                                                           Figure 910-                         3
                                                                              Helicopter Approach-                        Departure Flight Paths

Helicopter Landing Facility (HLF). Any area used for the landing and take off of helicopters including
heliports, helipads, and helistops. Peripheral areas, hangars, parking pads, passenger terminals, and
helicopter service areas are also part of such facilities.
           •                                            Private Helicopter Landing Facility. A helicopter landing facility which is restricted to use by
                      the owner or by persons authorized by the owner. Such facilities cannot be used by the
                      general public and are restricted to specific users and purposes.
           •                                            Public Helicopter Landing Facility. A helicopter landing facility which is open to use by the
                      general public, and where helicopter landings do not require prior permission of the owner.
                      It may be owned by a public agency, an individual, or other legal entity as long as it is open
                      for public use.

Helicopter Trip. Each landing or take-off of a helicopter. A landing and a take-off is counted as
two trips.
Heritage Tree. See Tree Types.
Historic Landmark. See Historic Resource.
Historic Landmark Tree. A tree designated by the Historic Landmarks Commission because of its
historical or cultural significance.
Historic Resource. A building, portion of a building, structure, object, landscape, tree, site, place, or
district that has a significant relationship to events or conditions of the human past. Historic
Resources may be important for archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical reasons. Historic
Resources include:

                                                                                                                                     910-                                                            13
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

        •                                            Historic Landmark. A Historic Landmark is a building, portion of a building, structure, object,
                 landscape, tree, site, or place that has been designated for its special archaeological,
                 architectural, cultural, or historical merit. Historic Landmark includes structures, objects,
                 and sites listed by the federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places on or before
                 January 27, 2017, that have not had their Historic Landmark designation removed.
                 Information supporting a specific Historic Landmark’s significance and integrity is found in
                 its National Register nomination or the documentation done in support of the City
                 designation. Historic Landmarks have boundaries that are described in the nomination or
                 documentation provided in support of the resource’s City designation or National Register
                 listing. If no boundary is provided in the designation or listing documentation, the boundary
                 is the site or sites that contain the Historic Landmark’s contributing resources;
        •                                            Conservation Landmark. A Conservation Landmark is a building, portion of a building,
                 structure, object, landscape, tree, site, or place that the City has designated for its special
                 archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical merit. Information supporting a specific
                 Conservation Landmark’s significance and integrity is found in the documentation done in
                 support of the City designation. Conservation Landmarks have boundaries that are
                 described in the documentation provided in support of the resource’s City designation. If no
                 boundary is provided in the designation or listing documentation, the boundary is the site or
                 sites that contain the Conservation Landmark’s contributing resources;
        •                                            National Register Landmark. A National Register Landmark is a building, structure, object,
                 or site that has been listed by the federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places
                 and has not been designated or identified by the City as a Historic Landmark or Conservation
                 Landmark. National Register Landmark includes resources listed by the federal Keeper of the
                 National Register of Historic Places after January 27, 2017, that have not been designated by
                 the City as a Historic Landmark or Conservation Landmark and resources that were listed by
                 the federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places on or before January 27, 2017
                 that have had their Historic Landmark or Conservation Landmark designation removed.
                 Information supporting a specific National Register Landmark’s significance and integrity is
                 found in its National Register nomination. National Register Landmarks have boundaries
                 that are described in the nomination provided in support of the federal listing;
        •                                            Historic District. A Historic District is a geographic area that has been designated for its
                 archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical merit. Historic District includes districts
                 listed by the federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places on or before January
                 27, 2017, that have not had their Historic District designation removed. Information
                 supporting a specific Historic District’s significance and integrity is found in its National
                 Register nomination or the documentation done in support of the City designation. Historic
                 Districts have boundaries that are described in the nomination or documentation provided
                 in support of the resource’s City designation or National Register listing;
        •                                            Conservation District. A Conservation District is a geographic area that the City has
                 designated for its special archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical merit.
                 Information supporting a specific Conservation District’s significance and integrity is found in
                 the documentation done in support of the City designation. Conservation Districts have
                 boundaries that are described in the documentation provided in support of the resource’s
                 City designation;
        •                                            National Register District. A National Register District is a district that has been listed by the
                 federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic and has not been designated or identified
                 by the City as a Historic District or Conservation District. National Register District includes

                                                                                                      910-                                                            14
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                  resources listed by the federal Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places after
                  January 27, 2017, that have not been designated by the City as a Historic District or
                  Conservation District and resources that were listed by the federal Keeper of the National
                  Register of Historic Places on or before January 27, 2017 that have had their Historic District
                  or Conservation District designation removed. Information supporting a specific National
                  Register District’s significance and integrity is found in its National Register nomination.
                  National Register Districts have boundaries that are described in the nomination provided in
                  support of the federal listing;
         •                                              Significant Resource. A Significant Resource is a building, portion of a building, structure,
                  object, landscape, tree, site, or place that the City has determined to be significant for its
                  archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical merit but has not been designated by the
                  City as a landmark or district, and has not been listed by the federal Keeper of the National
                  Register of Historic Places. Rank I, II, III resources identified in the 1984 Historic Resource
                  Inventory that have not been demolished or removed are Significant Resources; and
         •                                            Contributing Resource. A contributing resource is a building, portion of a building, structure,
                  object, landscape, tree, site, or place that adds to the archeological value, architectural
                  qualities, cultural significance, or historic associations, that make a Historic Landmark,
                  Conservation Landmark, National Register Landmark, Historic District, Conservation District,
                  National Register District, or Significant Resource important, as identified in the
                  documentation prepared for the City designation, National Register listing, or City Significant
                  Resource identification. If a resource is not identified or described in the documentation as
                  contributing to the historic significance of the landmark, district, or Significant Resource, it is
                  a noncontributing resource.
Historic Resources Inventory.               Buildings, portions of buildings, structures, objects, landscapes, trees,
sites, places, and districts that have been documented as having or potentially having
archaeological, architectural, cultural, or historical significance. The Historic Resource Inventory
includes all resources defined as Historic Resources. See Historic Resource.
Historic Restoration. Actions undertaken to accurately depict the form, features, and character of a
historic resource as it appeared at a particular period of time. This is done by removing features not
from that particular period, and reconstructing missing features from that particular period.
Historic Value. A physical, aesthetic, scenic, educational, or other characteristic which is a reminder
of important events or developments in Portland’s past.
Home Occupation. A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and
which is accessory to the Household Living use on the site.
House. See Residential Structure Types.
Houseboat Moorage. See Residential Structure Types.
Identified Wetlands, Identified Streams Identified Waterbodies. Those streams, wetlands, and
waterbodies that are identified in the resource inventory or maps as being significant and in need of
protection.
Institutional Campus. A medical or educational institution and associated uses, on a site at least 5
acres in area. Medical institutional campuses include medical centers and hospitals. Educational
institutional campuses include universities, colleges, high schools, and other similar institutions
offering course of study leading to a high school diploma or degree certified by a recognized

                                                                                                          910-                                                            15
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

accreditation body. Associated uses on institutional campuses may include some commercial and
light industrial uses, major event entertainment, residential, and other uses.
Intensity. The amount or magnitude of a use on a site or allowed in a zone. Generally, it is measured
by floor area. It may also be measured by such things as number of employees, amount of
production, trip generation, or hours of operation. See also Density.
Kennel. Any location where 5 or more dogs or cats aged 6 months or older are boarded or bred. The
sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for
sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.
Land Division. The act of dividing land to create new lots or tracts, or to reconfigure lots or tracts
within a recorded land division. The result of a land division is a subdivision plat or partition plat.
Actions that are exempt from the State law definitions of partition or subdivision (i.e., property line
adjustment) are not considered land divisions. See also, Expedited Land Division,            Lot, Tract, Plat, and
Property Line Adjustment.
Land Use Approval. A land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any
time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.
Ldn                                                    (or DNL). An averaged sound level measurement, taken during a 24 hour period, with a
weighting applied to night time sound levels. The Ldn noise contours described in Chapter 33.470,
Portland International Airport Noise Impact Zone, are based on Ldn levels that have been averaged
over the period of a year.
Light Rail Line.  A public rail transit line that usually operates at grade level and that provides high
capacity, regional level transit service. A light rail line is designed to share a street right-of-way
although it may also use a separate right-of-way or easement. Existing and future light rail lines are
designated on the Regional Transitways Map in the Transportation Element of the Comprehensive
Plan. Low capacity, district level, or excursion rail transit service, such as a streetcar, is not included.
Light Rail Alignment.  A public right-of-way or easement that has a light rail line in it, or that has
been designated as a preferred alternative light rail alignment. A Preferred Alternative Light Rail
Alignment is a public right-of-way or easement designated by City Council and the regional transit
agency as a future light rail alignment after completion of a Draft Environmental Impact Statement
(DEIS).
Light Truck. See Truck under Vehicle Types.
Live Stake. A live, rootable vegetative cutting that is driven into the ground.   Live stakes can be
integrated into rock (riprap), slopes, or used with bioengineering methods to stabilize slopes.
Living Area. The total gross building area of a residential structure excluding the following:
         •                                            garage area;
         •                                            basement area where the floor to ceiling height is less than 6 feet 8 inches;
         •                                            attic area, and other building area, that is not accessible by a stairway or where the floor to
                   ceiling height is less than 5 feet; and
         •                                            area between the outside of exterior walls and the inside of those walls. See Figure 910-15.

                                                                                                                 910-                                                            16
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 910-                         15
                                                                                                                                               Calculation of Living Area

Loading Area. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering
and loading of passengers, freight, or other articles.
Long-Term Bicycle Parking.             Long-                      term bicycle parking serves employees, students, residents,
commuters, and others who generally stay at a site for several hours or more. See also Short-Term
Bicycle Parking.
Long Term Parking. Parking having a duration of more than four hours.
Longest Street-Facing Wall. The longest wall that faces a street. If two or more street-                                                                    facing walls
are of equal length, and are the longest that face the street, then the applicant chooses which is to
be the longest street-                                                                 facing wall for purposes of applying regulations of this Title. See also, Façade,
and Chapter 33.930, Measurements.
Lot. See Lot-Related Definitions.
Lot-Related Definitions.
               •                                            Adjusted Lot. A lot that has had one or more of its lot lines altered through a deed, or other
                              instrument relocating a property line, that was recorded with the appropriate county
                              recorder prior to July 26, 1979, or through an approved property line adjustment. An
                              adjusted lot has a lot area that is equal to or larger than the original platted lot. See Figures
                              910-17 and 910-18.

                                                                                                                                                                                      910-                                                            17
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                         Figure 910-                         18
                                                                       Adjusted Lots with Equal Lot Areas as the Original Lots

            •                                            Corner Lot. A lot, adjusted lot, lot remnant, or lot of record that has frontage on more than
                         one intersecting street, and where the lot frontages intersect. A street that curves with
                         angles that are 120 degrees or less, measured from the center line of the street, is
                         considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner
                         lot. See Figure 910-4. A corner lot may also be a through lot.
            •                                            Flag Lot. A lot, adjusted lot, lot remnant, or lot of record with two distinct parts.
                         See Figure 910-5:
                             –                                          The flag, which is the only building site; and is located behind another lot; and
                             –                                          The pole, which connects the flag to the street; provides the only street frontage for
                                          the lot; and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone.
            •                                            Lot. A lot is a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a land
                         division. This definition includes the State definition of both lot, (result of subdividing), and
                         parcel, (result of partitioning). This definition also includes a lot that is smaller than the
                         original platted lot solely because of condemnation or required dedication by a public
                         agency for right-of-way. See also Ownership and Site.
            •                                            Lot of Record. A lot of record is a plot of land:
                             –                                          That was not created through an approved subdivision or partition;
                             –                                          That was created and recorded before July 26, 1979; and
                             –                                          For which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded with the
                                          appropriate county recorder.
            •                                            Lot Remnant. A lot that has had one or more of its lot lines altered through a deed, or other
                         instrument relocating a property line, that was recorded with the appropriate county
                         recorder prior to July 26, 1979, or through an approved property line adjustment. A lot
                         remnant has a lot area that less than the lot area of the original platted lot. This definition

                                                                                                                                                      910-                                                            18
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                                                       does not include lots that are smaller than the original platted lot solely because of
                                                       condemnation or required dedication by a public agency for right-of-way. See Figure 910-17.
                           •                                            Through Lot. A lot, adjusted lot, lot remnant, or lot of record that has frontage on two
                                                       streets, and where the lot frontages do not intersect. See Figure 910  -4. A through lot may
                                                       also be a corner lot.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 910-                         17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adjusted Lot and Lot Remnant

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    910-                                                            19
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 910-                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Flag Lot

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             910-                                                            20
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                                                                                                                                                               Figure 910-                         4
                                                                                                                                         Corner and Through Lots

Lot Lines. The property lines along the edge of a lot, adjusted lot, lot of record, lot remnant,           or site.
              •                                            Front Lot Line. A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street.  On a corner lot, the
                             front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street.   If two or more street lot lines
                             are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be
                             the front. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot
                             lines are of equal or unequal length. See Figure 910-6.
              •                                            Rear Lot Line. A lot line that is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines
                             but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are
                             most nearly opposite the front lot line. See Figure 910-8.
              •                                            Side Lot Line. A lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. On a corner lot, the longer lot
                             line which abuts a street is a side lot line. See Figure 910-6.
              •                                            Side Street Lot Line. A lot line that is both a side lot line and a street lot line. See Figures
                             910-6 and 910-7.
              •                                              Street Lot Line. A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. Street lot line does
                             not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot
                             lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines. See Figures 910-6
                             and 910-7.

Lot of Record. See Lot-Related Definitions.
Lot Remnant. See Lot-                Related Definitions.

                                                                                                                                                                            910-                                                            21
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 910-                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Front and Side Lot Lines

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 910-                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Street Lot Lines

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 910-                         8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lot Lines on Irregular Lots

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             910-                                                            22
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Main Entrance. A main entrance is the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to
use. Generally, each building has one main entrance. Main entrances are the widest entrance of
those provided for use by pedestrians. In multi-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into
the building's lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multi-tenant building
does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant's outside entrance is a
main entrance. In single-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into lobby, reception, or
sales areas.
Maintained street. A maintained street is a street that has been accepted for maintenance by the
City of Portland, Multnomah County, or the State of Oregon. See Title 17.42, Property Owner
Responsibility for Streets.
Maintenance. Actions, such as painting a previously painted surface or re-roofing using the same
type of materials, performed to prevent a structure, or one of its constituent systems, from falling
into a deteriorated condition.
Major Remodeling. Projects where the floor area is being increased by 50 percent or more, or
where the cost of the remodeling is greater than the assessed value of the existing improvements
on the site. Assessed value is the value shown on the applicable county assessment and taxation
records for the current year.
Manufactured Dwelling. See Residential Structure Types.
Manufactured Dwelling Park. Four or more manufactured dwellings which are located on a single
site for 30 days or more and intended for residential use. Manufactured dwelling park does not
include sites where unoccupied manufactured dwellings are offered for sale or lease. See also
Recreational Vehicle Park.
Manufactured Dwelling Space. The area occupied by a manufactured dwelling and its accessory
uses and structures in a manufactured dwelling park.
Manufactured Home. See Residential Structure Types.
Marina. A facility which provides secure moorings for recreational or commercial boats. The term
marina does not include houseboat moorages.
Market Garden. A site where food is grown to be sold. The food may be sold directly to consumers,
restaurants, stores, or other buyers, or at Farmers Markets.
Mass Shelter. A building that contains one or more open sleeping areas, or is divided only by
non-permanent partitions, and furnished with beds, cots, floor mats, or bunks. Individual bedrooms
are not provided. The shelter may or may not have food preparation or shower facilities. The shelter
is managed by a public or non-profit agency to provide shelter, with or without a fee, with no
minimum length of stay. Where individual bedrooms are provided, the facility is a short term
shelter. See also Outdoor Shelter and Short Term Shelter.
Mass Shelter Beds. Accommodation provided in a mass shelter. The number of beds is determined
by the maximum number of people who can be given overnight accommodations at one time on the
site.
Medium Truck. See Truck under Vehicle Types.

                                                                                                              910-                                                            23
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Mitigate. To rectify, repair, or compensate for impacts that result from other actions.
         •                                            Off-site Mitigation. Mitigation that does not take place on the site where the impact occurs.
         •                                            On-site Mitigation. Mitigation that takes place on the site where the impact occurs.
Mixed-Use. The combination on a site of residential uses with commercial or industrial uses.
Mobile Home. See Residential Structure Types.
Motor Home. See Recreational Vehicle, under Vehicle Types.
Motor Vehicle. See Vehicle Types.
Multi-Dwelling Development. See Residential Structure Types.
Multi-Dwelling Structure. See Residential Structure Types.
Near Shore Complexity. A combination of conditions within a river channel that includes at least
one of the following: diverse in-water vegetation communities, variations in water flow depth and
velocity, and a variety of structural elements such as rocks, logs, and rootwads.
Net Building Area.  Gross building area, excluding parking areas.
New Development. See Development, New                .
Noise Contour. A line that indicates the perimeter of areas that are within a specified
Ldn/DNL level.
Nonconforming Development. An element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking
area, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due
to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current
applicable development standards.
Nonconforming Residential Density.   A residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that
was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning
regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone.
Nonconforming Situation. A Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, or
Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a
site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also
Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, and Nonconforming Use.
Nonconforming Use. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a
required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or
zoning regulations, the use or the amount of area devoted to          the use is now prohibited in the zone.
Nondiscretionary Reviews. A nondiscretionary review is one where compliance with the regulations
can be determined based on objective standards. Decisions are made ministerially; they do not
require a public hearing or notice. Examples of these reviews include: whether the proposed use is
or is not allowed, whether the site area is or is not large enough for the proposed number of
housing units, and whether the proposed building meets all setback, height, and
parking requirements.
Nuisance Plants List. The Nuisance Plants List is part of the Portland Plant List, published by the
Bureau of Planning and Sustainability.

                                                                                                               910-                                                            24
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Operator. A person undertaking a development, the proprietor of a use or development, or the
owner of the land underlying a development. The operator may also be the manager or other
person who has oversight responsibility for the day to day operations of the use or development.
Ordinary Low Water. The line on the bank or shore to which the low water ordinarily recedes
annually in season. On the Willamette River, ordinary low water is defined as 8’ North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or 5.90’ City of Portland datum.
Organized Sports. Any athletic team play (scheduled games), by any ages, on a physically defined
sports field (natural or synthetic). Includes both scheduled athletic games associated with school
programs and non-school programs. Examples include T-ball, high-school football, youth baseball,
and soccer clubs. Organized sports does not include practice or other unstructured play such as pick-
up games or impromptu use and does not include play on hard-surfaced courts.
Outdoor Shelter. Individual shelters grouped together in an outdoor setting. Examples of individual
shelters include tents, yurts, huts, cabins, vehicles or other similar accommodation that do not
contain sanitary or cooking facilities, and recreational vehicles with or without cooking and sanitary
facilities. The shelter is managed by a public agency or a non-profit agency, with or without a fee,
and with no minimum length of stay. An outdoor shelter may or may not include buildings that have
food preparation or sanitary facilities. See also Mass Shelter and Short Term Shelter.
Outfall. A location where collected and concentrated water is discharged. The water may be treated
or untreated. Outfalls include discharge from stormwater management facilities, drainage pipe
systems, constructed open channels, and vegetated swales.
Owner. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record,
as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor.   Owner also includes
a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records,
but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of
recording.
Ownership. An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person,
partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common
ownership but are separated by a shared right-of-way. See Figure 910-9. See also, Lot and Site.

                                                                                                                       910-                                                            25
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                             Figure 910-                         9
                                                                                                                                               Ownership

Parcel. See Lot.
Parking Area. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of
motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-
passenger loading. See also, Driveway, Garage, Structured Parking, and Vehicle Areas.
Parking Space. A space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle.
Partial Street. See Street Types.
Passenger Vehicle. See Vehicle Types.
Paved Area. An uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface
(such as "Grasscrete") that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses.
Graveled areas are not paved areas.
Peace Officer. Peace Officer includes a member of the Oregon State Police, sheriff, constable,
marshal, or officer of the Bureau of Police.
Peak Hour Service. Service provided by public transit to a site, measured on weekdays between 7:00
AM and 8:30 AM and between 4:00 PM and 6:00 PM. The service is measured in one direction of
travel, and counts bus lines, streetcars, and light rail lines.
Pedestrian Access Route. A route between the main entrance of a building and short-term bicycle
parking that is hard surfaced, free of obstacles, and at width equal to that of the Pedestrian
standards of the Base Zone. The route can be on sidewalks, walkways, plazas, and other hard-
surfaced areas.
Pedestrian Connection. A pedestrian connection generally provides a through connection for
bicyclists and pedestrians between two streets or two lots. It may be a sidewalk that is part of a

                                                                                                                                                        910-                                                            26
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

street that also provides vehicle access, or it may be a self-                        contained street created solely for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
Pedestrian-                         Oriented Development. See Development Types.
Permanent Disturbance Area. See Disturbance Area, Permanent.
Person. Any person, partnership, association, or corporation.
Personal Wireless Service Facility. A type of Radio Frequency Transmission Facility that provides
telecommunication service as defined by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. These
facilities include technologies that currently exist or that may be developed in the future, including
but not limited to cellular, personal communications services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced
specialized mobile radio, paging, and similar Federal Communications Commission (FCC)-licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services.
Phased Development Plan. A phased development plan includes the following:
         •                                            A site plan showing the proposed final development of the site and phases, including the
                   initial and interim phases.
         •                                            A written statement describing each phase, including the potential uses, and the
                   approximate timeline for each phase of development.
Planning and Sustainability Director.          The Director of the City of Portland Bureau of Planning and
Sustainability, or the Director's designee.
Plat. Diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications,
provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the State law definitions
of “partition plat” and “subdivision plat”.
Plaza. An area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational
activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating,
drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping, for use by pedestrians.
Plot. A piece of land created by a partition, subdivision, deed, or other instrument recorded with the
appropriate county recorder. This includes a lot, an adjusted lot, a lot remnant,          a lot of record, a
tract, or a piece of land created through other methods.
Pollution Reduction Facility. A facility specifically designed to remove pollutants from stormwater.
Pollutants may include sediment, heavy metals, or plant nutrients.  These facilities generally include
native wetland plants which blend into surrounding habitat.
Potential Landslide Hazard Area. Potential Landslide Hazard Areas are shown on the City’s Potential
Landslide Hazard Areas Map.
PP&D. Portland Permitting & Development.
Practicable. Capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and
logistics in light of overall project purposes.
Primary Structure. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a
site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure.          The difference
between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement,
similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on
a site.

                                                                                                                 910-                                                            27
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Primary Use. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the
main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site
may have more than one primary use.
Private Helicopter Landing Facility. See Helicopter Landing Facility (HLF).
Project. An existing or proposed development.
Property Line Adjustment. The relocation of a single common property line between two abutting
properties. Also see Exchange Parcel. See Figure 910-10.

                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         10
                                                                                                                 Property Line Adjustment

Pruning. The cutting away or limbing of tree or shrub branches. Pruning does not include the
removal of any portion of the top of the tree, sometimes referred to as “topping”. Topping a tree is
considered destruction of the tree.
Public Access Easement. A public access easement is an easement granted to the public for all the
purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not limited to, pedestrian and
bicycle travel.
Public Safety Facility. A facility necessary to respond to an immediate hazard to the public health
and safety, and that is owned, leased, or operated by the City of Portland or the Urban Flood Safety
& Water Quality District. Public safety facilities include fire and police stations, flood control
facilities, water towers and pump stations needed for emergency service, and emergency
communication broadcast facilities.
Radio or Television Broadcast Facility. A type of Radio Frequency Transmission Facility that
disseminates radio and television communications intended to be received by the public, including
the direct transmission or by the intermediary of relay stations.
Rail Right-Of-Way. See Right-Of-Way, Rail.
Rear Lot Line. See Lot Lines.
Rear Setback. See Setback.

                                                                                                                                                 910-                                                            28
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Recognized Organization. An organization formally recognized by the Office of Community & Civic
Life pursuant to City Code 3.96.060, and organizations participating in Civic Life          ’s Diversity and Civic
Leadership Program.
Recreational Vehicle. See Vehicle Types.
Recreational Vehicle Park. A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or
other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required
stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale
or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks. See also Manufactured
Dwelling Park.
Recycling Drop-Off Center. A facility for the drop-off and temporary holding of materials such as
paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic, batteries, and motor oil. Processing of materials is limited to
glass breaking and separation. Recycling materials are not sold to a recycling drop-off center. A
recycling drop-off center is intended for household or consumer use. Use by commercial or
industrial establishments is not included. Unattended drop-off stations for single materials, such as
newsprint, are also not included.
Recycling Operation. A use where one or more recycling materials are accumulated, stored, sorted,
or processed. A recycling operation may get recycling materials from drop-off centers, from a
household or business pick-up operation, or from commercial or industrial uses. Materials may be
processed on site or accumulated in large quantities for eventual sale or transfer to other
processors. Recycling operation does not include the processing of yard debris or other
decomposable material except for clean paper products.
Regional Attractor. A Major Event Entertainment Use, Commercial Outdoor Recreation Use, or
Community Service Use with more than 100,000 square feet of net building area.
Remediation. The restoration and enhancement of resources and/or functional values lost as the
result of a violation of the environmental zone regulations.
Renewable Fuel. Renewable fuels (such as biodiesel, biomethane, and clean hydrogen) are
produced from non-petroleum, non-natural gas renewable resources and have less than 5 percent
fossil fuel content.
Repair. Actions to fix or mend a damaged or deteriorated structure, or one of its constituent
systems, with similar material while retaining sound parts or elements.
Replacement. Actions to substitute one material or system for another.
Residential Facility.  A residence for 6 to 15 physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff
persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment.
This definition includes the State definition of Residential Facility.
Residential Home. A residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for
staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or
treatment. This definition includes the State definition of Residential Home.
Residential Structure Types
         •                                              Accessory Dwelling Unit. An additional dwelling unit created on a                                                           lot with a primary
                  dwelling unit. The additional                                   unit is smaller than the primary dwelling unit except when the
                  accessory dwelling unit is in an existing basement. The accessory dwelling unit includes its
                  own independent living facilities including provision for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation,

                                                                                                           910-                                                            29
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                        and is designed for residential occupancy by one or more people, independent of the
                        primary dwelling unit. Kitchen facilities for cooking in the unit are described in Section
                        29.30.160 of Title 29, Property and Maintenance Regulations. The unit may have a separate
                        exterior entrance or an entrance to an internal common area accessible to the outside.
            •                                            Attached Duplex. A duplex, located on its own lot         , that shares one or more common or
                        abutting walls with one or more dwelling units          . The common or abutting wall must be
                        shared for at least 25 percent of the length of the side of the dwelling.
            •                                            Attached House. Except for individual dwelling units on lots created through a middle
                        housing land division, a           dwelling unit, located on its own lot          , that shares one or more
                        common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. The common or abutting wall
                        must be shared for at least 25                                                  percent of the length of the side of the building.                                                            The shared
                        or abutting walls may be any wall of the buildings, including the walls of attached garages.
                        An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling units. An
                        attached house is also called a rowhouse or a common-wall house. See Figure 910-16.

                                                                                                                                    Figure 910-                         16
                                                                                                                               Attached Houses

            •                                              Congregate Housing Facility. A building, buildings, or portion of a building that includes
                        separate bedrooms and individual or shared bathrooms but does not include a kitchen or if
                        it does include a kitchen the number of kitchens is less than one kitchen per 12 bedrooms.
            •                                              Cottage Cluster. A grouping of no fewer than three and no more than 16 individual
                        detached primary dwelling units on one lot. A cottage cluster on a site that is divided
                        through a middle housing land division remains a cottage cluster.
            •                                            Duplex. A building that contains two primary dwelling units on one lot. In this case, the units
                        must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling. In the single-dwelling zones, a duplex

                                                                                                                                                 910-                                                            30
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                  can also be two detached primary dwelling units on one lot. A duplex on a site that is
                  divided through a middle housing land division remains a duplex.
         •                                            Dwelling Unit.  A building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities
                  including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential
                  occupancy by a group of people, except that a congregate housing facility is not a dwelling
                  unit. Kitchen facilities for cooking are described in Section 29.30.160 of Title 29, Property
                  and Maintenance Regulations. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are
                  considered to contain multiple dwelling units unless the additional cooking facilities are
                  clearly accessory, such as an outdoor grill.
         •                                            Fourplex. A structure that contains four primary dwelling units on one lot. Each unit must
                  share a common wall or common floor/ceiling with at least one other unit. A fourplex on a
                  site that is divided through a middle housing land division remains a fourplex.
         •                                            House. Except for a detached dwelling unit on a lot that was created through a middle
                  housing land division, a detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.
         •                                            Houseboat Moorage. A facility which provides moorings for houseboats.
         •                                            Manufactured Dwelling. A dwelling unit constructed off of the site which can be moved on
                  the public roadways. Manufactured dwellings include residential trailers, mobile homes, and
                  manufactured homes.
                     –                                          Manufactured Home. A manufactured home is a manufactured dwelling constructed
                              after June 15, 1976 in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and
                              safety standards (HUD code) in effect at the time of construction.
                     –                                          Mobile Home. A mobile home is a manufactured dwelling constructed between
                              January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, in accordance with the construction requirements
                              of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.
                     –                                          Residential Trailer. A residential trailer is a manufactured dwelling constructed before
                              January 1, 1962, which was not constructed in accordance with federal manufactured
                              housing construction and safety standards (HUD code), or the construction
                              requirements of Oregon mobile home law.
         •                                            Multi-Dwelling Development. Except for cottage clusters, a grouping of individual
                  structures where each structure contains 1 or more dwelling units.  The land underneath the
                  structures is not divided into separate lots. The key characteristic of this housing type is that
                  there is no requirement for the structures on the sites to be attached.
         •                                            Multi-Dwelling Structure. A structure that contains five           or more dwelling units that share
                  common walls or floor/ceilings with one or more units. The land underneath the structure is
                  not divided into separate lots. Multi-dwelling includes structures commonly called garden
                  apartments, apartments, and condominiums.
         •                                            Triplex. A structure that contains three primary dwelling units on one lot. Each unit must
                  share a common wall or common floor/ceiling with at least one other unit. A triplex on a site
                  that is divided through a middle housing land division remains a triplex.

Residential Trailer. See Residential Structure Types.
Resource Enhancement. The modification of resources or functional values. This may include the
short-term loss of resources or functional values, to achieve improved quality or quantity of the
resource or functional values in the long term or for future desired conditions. It can include actions
that result in increased animal and plant species, increased numbers of types of natural habitat,
and/or increased amount of area devoted to natural habitat. It may also include improvements in

                                                                                                             910-                                                            31
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

scenic views and sites, increased capacity for stormwater detention or infiltration, increased or
improved floodplain function, changes in water quantity or quality, changes in ecosystem type, or
other improvements to resources or functional values. A resource enhancement project must result
in a net gain in total functional value and improvement in the quality or quantity of resources on the
site.
Retaining Wall. A vertical, or near vertical structure, that holds back soil or rock, and prevents
movement of material down slope or erosion on a site.
Review Body. The person or group who is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether
initially or on appeal. Review body includes the Director of PP&D                         , the Hearings Officer, the Historic
Landmarks Commission, Design Commission, Planning Commission, and the City Council.
Right-Of-Way. An area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes
passageways such as freeways, pedestrian connections, alleys, and all streets. A right-of-way may
be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency, or it
may be privately owned. A right          -of-way that is not dedicated or deeded to the public will be in a
tract. Where allowed by Section 33.654.150, Ownership, Maintenance, and Public Use of Rights-Of-
Way, the right-of-way may be in an easement.
Right-of-way, Rail. A public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.
Riparian Areas. Lands which are adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other water bodies.
They are transitional between aquatic and upland zones, and as such, contain elements of both
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. They have high water tables because of their close proximity to
aquatic systems, soils which are usually made up largely of water-               carried sediments, and some
vegetation that requires free (unbound) water or conditions that are more moist than normal.
Riparian Functional Values. The functional values provided along a healthy river shore, including:
food and habitat for fish and wildlife; dynamic channel forming processes; cool clean water; an
amount and timing of water flow that reflects the natural hydrologic regime; and a microclimate
beneficial to fish and wildlife.
River Bank Complexity. A combination of conditions along a river shore that includes at least one of
the following: diverse vegetation communities, variations in bank slope and shoreline roughness,
and a variety of structural elements such as rocks, log, and rootwads.
River-Dependent. A use which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to a river because it
requires access to the river for waterborne transportation or recreation. River-dependent also
includes development, which by its nature, can be built only on, in, or over a river. Bridges
supported by piers or pillars, as opposed to fill, are river-               dependent development.
River-Related. A use or development which is not directly dependent upon access to a water body
but which provides goods or services that are directly associated with river-               dependent land or
waterway use or development, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public
loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Residences (including houseboats), parking areas,
spoil and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and recreational
vehicle parks are not generally considered dependent or related to water.   Recreational trails and
viewpoints adjacent to the river are river-                related development. Bridge exit and entrance ramps
supported by piers or pillars, as opposed to fill, are river-               related development. Removal or remedial
actions of hazardous substances conducted under ORS 465.200 through 465.510 and 475.900 are
considered river-                related development for the duration of the removal or remedial action.

                                                                                                     910-                                                            32
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Roadway. The portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle travel. Roadway includes
vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs,
parking strips, or sidewalks.
Scenic Corridor. A scenic corridor is a linear scenic resource. It may include streets, bikeways, trails,
or waterways (rivers, creeks, sloughs) through parks, natural areas, or urban areas. The corridor may
include scenic views along it, but may also be valued for its intrinsic scenic qualities, such as a
winding road through a wooded area. See also, View Corridor.
Scenic Site. A scenic site is an area valued for its aesthetic qualities. The area may be made up
primarily of natural vegetated cover and water, or include structures and manmade landscaping.
Scenic sites may include scenic viewpoints, but do not necessarily do so.
Scenic View. A scenic view is a view that may be framed, wide angle, or panoramic and may include
natural and/or manmade structures and activities. A scenic view may be from a stationary viewpoint
or be seen as one travels along a roadway, waterway, or path. A view may be to a far away object,
such as a mountain, or of a nearby object, such as a city bridge.
Scenic Viewpoint. A scenic viewpoint is a location from which to enjoy a scenic view. A viewpoint
may be a generalized location, such as a butte, and include several vantage points where the view
may be seen to best advantage, or a single observation point.
School Site. An improved site that has, formerly had, or proposes to have a school use on it and that
is owned by the entity that runs, ran, or will run the school.
Seep or Spring. An area where groundwater is discharged onto the land surface, creating either
saturated soil conditions or visible flow at the land surface.
Services. For the purposes of the 600s series of chapters, services are water service, sanitary sewage
disposal, stormwater management systems, and rights-of-way.
Setback. The minimum distance required between a specified object, such as a building and another
point. Setbacks are usually measured from lot lines to a specified object. Unless otherwise indicated,
an unspecified setback refers to a building setback. In addition, the following setbacks indicate
where each setback is measured from. See Chapter 33.930, Measurements, for measurement
information.
         •                                            Front Setback. A setback that is measured from a front lot line.
         •                                              Garage Entrance Setback. A setback that is measured from a street lot line to the entrance
                  to a garage or carport. It is essentially a minimum driveway length. See Chapter 33.930,
                  Measurements, for more specific measurement information.
         •                                            Rear Setback. A setback that is measured from a rear lot line.
         •                                              Side Setback. A setback that is measured from a side lot line.
         •                                              Street Setback. A setback that is measured from a street lot line.

Shallow Water Habitat. Land and riverbed located between the ordinary high water mark and 20
feet below the ordinary low water mark of the Willamette or Columbia Rivers.
Shelter Beds. See Mass Shelter Beds.
Short-Term Bicycle Parking.              Short-term bicycle parking serves shoppers, customers, messengers,
and other visitors to a site who generally stay for a short time. See also Long-Term Bicycle Parking.

                                                                                                               910-                                                            33
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Short Term Shelter. A building                        that contains one or more individual bedrooms, and where
occupancy of all rooms may be arranged with no minimum length of stay          . The short term  shelter
facility may or may not have food preparation facilities, and shower or bath facilities may or may not
be shared. The facility is managed by a public or non-profit agency to provide shelters           , with or
without a fee. Examples include transitional housing, and emergency shelters                   where individual
rooms are provided. Where individual bed          rooms are not provided, the facility is           a mass shelter. See
also Mass Shelter and Outdoor Shelter.
Short Term Parking. Parking having a duration of four hours or less.
Side Lot Line. See Lot Lines.
Side Setback. See Setback.
Side Street Lot Line. See Lot Lines.
Sign. As defined in Title 32, Signs and Related Regulations
Significant Detrimental Impact. An impact that affects the natural environment to the point where
existing ecological systems are disrupted or destroyed. It is an impact that results in the loss of
vegetation, land, water, food, cover, or nesting sites.            These elements are considered vital or
important for the continued use of the area by wildlife, fish, and plants, or the enjoyment of the
area's scenic qualities.
Site. For land divisions, the site is the lots, lots of record, or tracts proposed to be divided or
reconfigured. For development on a lot that was created through a middle housing land division, the
site is the original site prior to being divided. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership except
as follows:
          •                                            If a proposed development includes more than one ownership, then all the ownerships are
                    included as the site.
          •                                            If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the
                    ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the
                    ownership that is proposed for development.
          •                                            If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other
                    development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the
                    portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for
                    development.
Site Frontage. The part of a site that abuts a street.  See also, Block Frontage.
Small Scale Energy Production. Energy production where the energy is derived from the following:
          •                                            Solar;
          •                                            Small wind energy turbines;
          •                                            Geothermal;
          •                                            Hydroelectric systems that produce up to 100 kW;
          •                                            Waste heat capture, heat exchange or co -generation of energy as a byproduct of another
                    manufacturing process;
          •                                            The following systems that use only biological material or byproducts produced, harvested
                    or collected on-site. Up to 10 tons a week of biological material or byproducts from other
                    sites may be used where the base zone regulations specifically allow it:

                                                                                                                          910-                                                            34
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

                        •                                            Biogas. Generation of energy by breaking down biological material in anaerobic
                                  conditions to produce gas that can be used to generate electricity or heat. The process
                                  generally occurs inside a closed system such as a tank or container.
                        •                                            Biomass. Generation of energy through the combustion of biological material to
                                  produce heat, steam, or electricity.
          •                                            Any of the methods listed here or natural gas used to produce steam, heat or cooling, with
                    an output up to 1 megawatt.

See also Utility Scale Energy Production, and Wind Energy Turbine.
Special Flood Hazard Area. Land area covered by the floodwaters of the base flood, as shown on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) maps in effect on November 26, 2010. The base
flood is the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This
is the regulatory standard also referred to as the “100-year flood.”
Stormwater Facility. A facility designed to improve the quality and manage the quantity of
stormwater runoff. Stormwater facilities include vegetated and sand filters, wet or dry ponds,
marshes, infiltration facilities, and structural storm sewer devices. Stormwater facilities do not
include conveyance systems that are meant only for conveying the stormwater from one place to
another and do not affect the quality or quantity of the stormwater.
Stormwater Management System. A stormwater facility, and a conveyance system or an outfall.
Stream. An area where enough natural surface water flows to produce a stream channel, such as a
river or creek, that carries flowing surface water during some portion of the year. This includes:
          •                                            The water itself, including any vegetation,  aquatic life, or habitat;
          •                                            Beds and banks below the high water level which may contain water, whether or not water
                    is actually present;
          •                                            The floodplain between the high water level of connected side channels;
          •                                            Beaver ponds, oxbows, and side channels if they are connected by surface flow to the
                    stream during a portion of the year; and
          •                                            Stream-associated wetlands.

See also Identified Streams.
Stream Channel. An area which demonstrates evidence of the passage of water. The depression
between the banks worn by the regular and usual flow of the water. The channel need not contain
water year-                                        round. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water
runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses.
Street. See Street Types.
Street Lot Line. See Lot Lines.
Street Setback. See Setback.
Street-fac ing Facade. All the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view that are at an
angle of 45 degrees or less from a street lot line. See Figure 910-12.

                                                                                                                           910-                                                            35
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                                                                                                                                              Figure 910-                         12
                                                                                                                                  Street-facing Facade

Streetcar Alignment. A street, right-                 of-way, or easement that has a streetcar line in it. For
comparison, see Light Rail Alignment.
Streetcar Line. A public rail transit line that generally operates at grade level and that provides local
transit service with stops that are close together. A streetcar line is designed to share a street with
traffic, although it may also use a separate right-of-way or easement. For comparison, see also Light
Rail Line.
Street Types. See also Alley, Pedestrian Connection, Right-of-Way, and Roadway.
             •                                            Arterial. Any street that is not a Local Service Traffic Street according to the Transportation
                          System Plan. It includes Regional Trafficways, Major City Traffic Streets, District and
                          Neighborhood Collectors, and Traffic Access Streets.
             •                                            Common Green. A street that provides for pedestrian and bicycle access, but not vehicle
                          access, to abutting property and generally provides a common area for use by residents. A
                          common green may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features may be
                          included in a common green, such as groundcover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios,
                          benches, or gazebos.
             •                                            Dead-                         End Street. A street that connects to another street at only one end, or extends from
                          an existing dead-end street. Dead-end streets serve 2 or more lots that have frontage only
                          on the dead-end street. A pedestrian connection may extend from the end of a dead -end
                          street to connect with another street of any type, or with another pedestrian connection.
             •                                              Local Service Street. A street that is a Local Service Traffic Street according to the
                          Transportation System Plan.

                                                                                                                                                           910-                                                            36
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

         •                                            Partial Street. A partial street is one or more parts of a dead-end street or through street;
                  each part usually is located on a different site. Partial streets are created when a street will
                  be completed in stages, on more than one site. Partial streets may include the whole or part
                  of a turnaround, part of the total width, or part of the total length.
         •                                            Shared Court. A street that is designed to accommodate –                                                     within the same circulation space
                  – access for vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles to abutting property. Instead of a sidewalk
                  area that is separate from vehicle areas, a shared court is surfaced with paving blocks, bricks
                  or other ornamental pavers to clearly indicate that the entire street is intended for
                  pedestrians as well as vehicles. A shared court may also include traffic calming measures to
                  ensure safe co-existence of pedestrians, vehicles, and bicycles.  Like a common green, a
                  shared court may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features and
                  street furniture may be included in a shared court, such as trees, shrubs, lighting fixtures,
                  and benches.
         •                                            Street. A right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle travel or for
                  motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting property. For the purposes of this
                  Title, street does not include alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor
                  vehicle access, or the interstate freeways and the Sunset Highway including their ramps.
         •                                              Through Street. A street that connects to other streets at both ends.
         •                                              Transit Street. A street that is classified in the Transportation System            Plan as:
                     –                                          A Major Transit Priority Street, Transit Access Street, or Community Transit Street; or
                     –                                          A Regional Transitway not also classified as a Regional Trafficway, according to the
                              Transportation System Plan.  Regional Transitways that are entirely subsurface are not
                              included for the purposes of this Title.

Structure. Any object constructed in or on the ground.  Structure includes buildings, decks, fences,
towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects.  Structure does not include paved areas or
vegetative landscaping materials.
Structured Parking. A covered structure or portion of a covered structure that provides parking
areas for motor vehicles. Parking on top of a structure—where there is gross building area below the
parking, but nothing above it—is structured parking. The structure can be the primary structure for
a Commercial Parking facility or be accessory to multi-         dwelling residential, commercial,
employment, industrial, institutional, or other structures. A structure that is accessory to a house,
attached house, duplex, triplex, fourplex,            cottage cluster, manufactured dwelling, or houseboat is a
garage and is not included as structured parking. See also Garage, Parking Area, and Underground
Parking.
Superblock. A continuous area, either in single or multiple ownerships, which includes a vacated
street and which has a total gross area in private property of at least 75,000 square feet.
Supermarket. A supermarket is a retail store with more than 20,000 square feet of net building
area, selling a complete assortment of food, food preparation and wrapping materials, and
household cleaning and servicing items.
Surface Parking. A parking area for motor vehicles where there is no gross building area below the
parking area and no gross building area or roof above it. Area occupied by small, permanent
buildings, such as booths used by parking attendants, is not parking area. Temporary vending carts
are not gross building area.
Temporary Disturbance Area. See Disturbance Area, Temporary.

                                                                                                             910-                                                            37
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

Through Lot. See Lot-Related Definitions.
Through Street. See Street Types.
Top of Bank. The largest decrease in slope that is 10 percent or greater between the ordinary high
water mark of a water body and a point 50 feet landward from the ordinary high water mark. See
Section 33.930.150, Measuring Top of Bank. If there is no decrease in slope that is 10 percent or
greater within a distance of 50 feet from the ordinary high water mark, then the top of bank will be
the default location described in Section 33.930.150, Measuring Top of Bank.
Topping. The inappropriate pruning practice used to reduce tree height by cutting to a
predetermined crown limit without regard to tree health or structural integrity. Topping does not
include acceptable pruning practices as described in the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) "A 300 Pruning Standards" and companion "Best Management Practices for Tree Pruning"
published by the International Society of Arboriculture, such as crown reduction, utility pruning, or
crown cleaning to remove a safety hazard, dead or diseased material.
Tower.              A tall structure with the intended purpose of elevating a Radio Frequency Transmission
Facility high above the ground. This definition includes but is not limited to a tower, pole, or mast
over 20 feet tall.
Tract. A piece of land created and designated as part of a land division that is not a lot, adjusted lot,
lot remnant, lot of record, or a public right          -of-way. Tracts are created and designed for a specific
purpose. Land uses within a tract are restricted to those uses consistent with the stated purpose as
described on the plat, or in the maintenance agreements, or through Conditions, Covenants and
Restrictions (CC&Rs). Examples include stormwater management tracts, private street or alley
tracts, tree preservation tracts, environmental resource tracts, and open space tracts.
Transit Station. A location where light rail vehicles stop to load or unload passengers.  For purposes
of measuring, the Transit Station consists of the station platform.
Transit Street. See Street Types.
Transportation Management Association. An organization devoted to managing transportation or
parking within a local community. A main goal for a Transit Management Association is to reduce
reliance on the automobile for both work and non-work trips. A Transit Management Association
typically provides information, programs, and activities that encourage the use of carpooling,
transit, and other alternative modes of travel along with efficient use of parking resources.
Tree Grove. A group of six or more native trees at least 12 inches in diameter, or Oregon white oak
trees or Pacific madrone trees that are at least 6 inches in diameter and that form a generally
continuous canopy, or are spaced as appropriate for that species or species assemblage. Groves are
generally non-linear. Other trees and understory vegetation located within the grove are considered
part of the grove and are counted as part of the canopy area. A tree grove may be identified by a
qualified professional, such as an arborist or environmental scientist, based on the types,
configuration, or functions of a grouping of trees. Functions include structural support and wind
protection for the trees within the grove, microclimate and shade, and habitat such as nesting,
foraging, and cover for birds and other wildlife.

                                                                                                          910-                                                            38
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

Tree Types
          •                                            Dangerous Tree is one where the condition of the tree presents a foreseeable danger of
                    inflicting damage that cannot be alleviated by treatment or pruning. A tree may be
                    dangerous because it is likely to injure people or damage vehicles, structures, or
                    development, such as sidewalks or utilities.
          •                                            Dead Tree is a tree that is dead or has been damaged beyond repair or where not enough
                    live tissue, green leaves, limbs, or branches exist to sustain life as determined by an arborist.
          •                                              Dying Tree is a tree in an advanced state of decline because it is diseased, infested by
                    insects or rotting and cannot be saved by reasonable treatment or pruning, or must be
                    removed to prevent spread of the infestation or disease to other trees or is imminently
                    likely to become a danger or die.
          •                                            Heritage Tree. Trees designated as Historic Landmark Trees, Historic Trees, and Heritage
                    Trees by the City of Portland.
          •                                            Non-Native Non-Nuisance Tree. A tree that is not identified as either a native tree species
                    or a nuisance tree species in the Portland Plant List.

Triplex. See Residential Structure Types.
Truck.               See Vehicle Types.
Underground Parking. Structured parking that does not qualify as floor area. See Structured Parking,
Gross Building Area, and Floor Area.
Uplands. Lands not characterized by the presence of riparian areas, water bodies, or wetlands.
Utilities. Infrastructure services, including those in the Basic Utility Use Category, and structures
necessary to deliver those services.  These services may be provided by a public or a private agency.
Examples include water, sanitary sewer, electricity, natural gas, and telephone.
For the purposes of the 600s series of chapters, utilities are telephone, cable, natural gas, electric,
and telecommunication facilities.
Utility Scale Energy Production. Energy production that does not meet the definition of Small Scale
Energy Production.
Utility Trailer. See Vehicle Types.
Valet Parking. Parking arrangement in which drivers leave and reclaim their cars at a destination
site, with the cars parked at an off-                            site location by employees associated with the destination site.
The valet parking occurs at the off-                            site location where the cars are parked.
Vegetation. All types of vegetation, including trees, shrubs, forbs, grasses, and other plants.
Vegetative Maintenance. Control of vegetation that encroaches or grows into public pathways or
public drainageways and where maintenance is required for public safety. The control methods may
include vegetation trimming or removal.
Vehicle Areas. All the area on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas,
driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also, Driveway and Parking Area.
Vehicle Types.
          •                                            Motor Vehicle. Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the
                    transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger

                                                                                                                       910-                                                            39
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

                  vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles with motive power. See also Passenger Vehicle,
                  Recreational Vehicle, and Truck.
         •                                            Passenger Vehicle. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten persons or less including the
                  driver. Passenger vehicle also includes motor vehicles designed to carry ten persons or less
                  that are constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-                            road
                  use. Passenger vehicle includes vehicles commonly called cars, minivans, passenger vans,
                  and jeeps. Passenger vehicle is intended to cover the vehicles defined as passenger cars and
                  multipurpose passenger vehicles by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in
                  Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3.   See also Recreational
                  Vehicle, and Truck.
         •                                            Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for sport or
                  recreational use, or which is designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis.
                  Recreational vehicle is divided into two categories as follows:
                     –                                            Accessory recreational vehicle. Accessory recreational vehicle includes nonmotorized
                               vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis such as travel            trailers,
                               park model recreational vehicles, campers, and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is
                               considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. Accessory
                               recreational vehicle also includes vehicles designed for off-                            road use, such as off-road
                               vehicles, dune buggies, and recreational boats.
                     –                                          Motor home. Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy
                               on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back
                               of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations
                               specifically indicate otherwise. See also Truck.
         •                                            Truck.              A motor vehicle which is designed primarily for the movement of property or special
                  purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten persons.
                  Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes
                  and other similar vehicles. Truck is intended to cover the vehicles defined as trucks and
                  buses by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of
                  Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. Trucks are divided into three categories by
                  size as stated below. See also Passenger Vehicle, and Recreational Vehicle.
                     –                                          Light Truck. Light trucks are trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single
                               rear wheels.
                     –                                          Medium Truck. Medium trucks are trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck
                               tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the Heavy
                               Truck category.
                     –                                            Heavy Truck.               Heavy trucks are trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with
                               two or more rear axles.
         •                                              Utility Trailer. A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry
                  property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less in length. Boat trailers are
                  included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than 16 feet in length are
                  considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.

View Corridor. A view corridor is a three-dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The
width of the view corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus of the view may be a single
object, such as Mt. Hood, which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such as the
downtown skyline, which would result in a wide corridor. Panoramic views have very wide corridors

                                                                                                               910-                                                            40
Title 33, Planning and Zoning                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 33.910
7/1/26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Definitions

and may include a 360-degree perspective. Although the view corridor extends from the viewpoint
to the focus of the view, the mapped portion of the corridor extends from the viewpoint and is
based on the area where base zone heights must be limited in order to protect the view.    See also,
Scenic Corridor.
Viewing Area.  Part of a site developed for educational or public viewing purposes.  The viewing area
may be hard surfaced or decking, or within a structure such as a duck blind.
Waste Collection Areas. Waste collection areas include areas set aside or designed to be used for
garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. Waste collection areas include areas
occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles.
Water Bodies. Permanently or temporarily flooded lands which may lie below the deepwater
boundary of wetlands. Water depth is such that water, and not the air, is the principal medium in
which prevalent organisms live, whether or not they are attached to the bottom. The bottom may
sometimes be considered nonsoil or the water may be too deep or otherwise unable to support
emergent vegetation.  Water bodies include rivers, streams, creeks, sloughs, drainageways, lakes,
and ponds. See also Identified Waterbodies.
Water Quality Resource Area. The water quality resource area is a vegetated corridor and the
adjacent protected water feature. The functional values of the water quality resource area include:
providing a vegetated corridor to separate protected water features from development; maintaining
or reducing stream temperatures; maintaining natural stream corridors; minimizing erosion,
nutrient and pollutant loading into water; filtering, infiltration and natural water purification; and
stabilizing slopes to prevent landslides contributing to sedimentation of water features.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.  Wetlands include swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas. See also Identified Wetlands.
Wildlife Species of Concern. Wildlife species of concern are those species with a large enough body
mass (i.e. raptors, waterfowl, coyote, great blue heron or species with flocking behavior (i.e.
European starling, gulls) that can result in a high probability of severe impact with aircraft.  The
wildlife species of concern list is in the Port of Portland's Wildlife Hazard Management Plan, as
authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration.
Wind Turbine or Wind Energy Turbine. A wind turbine or wind energy turbine converts kinetic wind
energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of
a mast or mounting frame and structural supports, electrical generator, transformer, energy storage
equipment, and a rotor with one or more blades. Some turbines use a vertical axis/helix instead of
rotor blades.
        •                                            Small Wind Turbines or Small Wind Energy Turbines are turbines with an American Wind
                 Energy Association (AWEA) rated power output of 10 kW or less.  They also are certified by
                 the Small Wind Certification Council to meet the American Wind Energy Associations
                 (AWEA) Small Wind Turbine Performance and Safety Standards. These turbines may or may
                 not be connected to the power grid.
        •                                            Large Wind Turbines or Large Wind Energy Turbines are turbines with a rated power output
                 of more than 10kW and up to 300 kW. These turbines may or may not be connected to the
                 power grid.

                                                                                                       910-                                                            41
Chapter 33.910                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Title 33, Planning and Zoning
Definitions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7/1/26

(Amended by: Ord. No. 163957, effective 4/12/91; Ord. No. 164899, effective 12/11/91; Ord. No.
165417, effective 6/5/92; Ord. No. 165681, effective 7/15/92; Ord. No. 166313, effective 4/9/93;
Ord. No. 166702, effective 7/30/93; Ord. No. 167054, effective 10/25/93; Ord. No. 167127, effective
12/17/93; Ord. No. 167186, effective 12/31/93; Ord. No. 167189, effective 1/14/94; Ord. No.
167293, effective 1/19/94; Ord. No. 168698, effective 4/17/95; Ord. No. 169535, effective 1/8/96;
Ord. No. 169763, effective 3/25/96; Ord. No. 169987, effective 7/1/96; Ord. No. 170248, effective
9/17/96; Ord. No. 170704, effective 1/1/97; Ord. No. 171219, effective 7/1/97; Ord. No. 171740,
effective 11/14/97; Ord. No. 171718, effective 11/29/97; Ord. No. 171879, effective 2/2/98; Ord. No.
172882, effective 11/18/98; Ord. No. 173015, effective 2/12/99; Ord. 173528, effective 7/30/99;
Ord. No. 174263, effective 4/15/00; Ord. No. 174378, effective 5/26/00; Ord. No. 175204, effective
3/1/01; Ord. Nos. 175341 and 175358, effective 3/16/01; Ord. No. 175837, effective 9/7/01; Ord. No.
175877, effective 9/21/01; Ord. No. 175966, effective 10/26/01; Ord. No.176351, effective 3/27/02;
Ord. No. 176443, effective 5/30/02; Ord. Nos. 175965 and 176333, effective 7/1/02; Ord. No.
176469, effective 7/1/02; Ord. No. 176587, effective 7/20/02; Ord. No. 177028, effective 12/14/02;
Ord. No. 177082, effective 1/20/03; Ord. No. 177422, effective 6/7/03; Ord. No. 177701, effective
8/30/03; Ord. No. 178020, effective 12/20/03; Ord. No. 178172, effective 3/5/04; Ord. No. 178509,
effective 7/16/04; Ord. No. 178657, effective 9/3/04; Ord. No. 179092, effective 4/1/05; Ord. No.
179540, effective 9/26/05; Ord. No. 179845, effective 1/20/06; Ord. No. 179925, effective 3/17/06;
Ord. Nos. 179980 and 179994, effective 4/22/06; Ord. No. 180619, effective 12/22/06; Ord. No.
181357, effective 11/9/07; Ord. No. 182429, effective 1/16/09; Ord. No. 183269, effective 10/1/09;
Ord. No. 183598, effective 4/24/10; Ord. No. 183750, effective 6/4/10; Ord. No. 184016, effective
08/20/10; Ord. No. 184235, effective 11/26/10; Ord. No. 184521, effective 5/13/11; Ord. No.
184524, effective 7/1/11; Ord. No. 185412, effective 6/13/12; Ord. No. 815915, effective 5/1/13;
Ord. No. 186639, effective 7/11/14; Ord.  No. 186736, effective 8/29/14; Ord. No. 186053, effective
1/1/15; Ord. No. 187216, effective 7/24/15; Ord. No. 187471                                                 , effective 1/1/16; Ord. No. 188077,
effective 12/9/16; Ord. No. 188142, effective 1/13/17;                       Ord. No. 188259                                                 , effective 3/31/17;  Ord. No.
188177, effective 5/24           /18; Ord. No.                         188958, effective 5/24/18; Ord. No. 189000                                                 , effective 7/9/18;
Ord. No. 189807                                                 , effective 12/18/19; Ord. No. 189805, effective 3/1/20                                              ; Ord. No. 190023, effective
8/10/20 and 8/1/21; Ord. No. 190093, effective 9/11/20 and 8/1/21; Ord. No. 190241                                               , effective
3/1/21; Ord. No. 190380, effective 4/30/21 and 8/1/21; Ord. No. 190687                                                 , effective 3/1/22; Ord. No.
190851, effective 6/30/22; Ord. No.                                                                                      190978, effective 8/31/22; Ord. No. 190834                                                 , effective 10/1/22;
Ord. No. 191164                                                 , effective 3/31/23; Ord. No. 191310                                                 , effective 6/30/23; Ord. No. 191477, effective
3/1/24; Ord. No. 191779, effective 10/1/24; Ord. No. 192152, effective 7/1/2026. )

                                                                                                                       910-                                                            42
