 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
Chapter 19.105 
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY 
Sections: 
19.105.010    Purpose.  
19.105.020    Definitions.  
19.105.030    General provisions.  
19.105.040    Administration.  
19.105.050    Conditional uses.  
19.105.060    Prohibited uses.  
19.105.070    General standards for flood hazard reduction.  
19.105.080    Variance and appeal procedure.  
19.105.010 Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, 
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by 
provisions designed to: (1) protect human life and health; (2) minimize expenditure of 
public money and costly flood control projects; (3) minimize the need for rescue and relief 
efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general 
public; (4) minimize prolonged business interruptions; (5) minimize damage to public 
facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, 
streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; (6) help maintain a stable tax 
base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so 
as to minimize future flood blight areas; (7) ensure that potential buyers are notified that 
property is in an area of special flood hazard; and (8) ensure that those who occupy the 
areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 
1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1) 
19.105.020 Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be 
interpreted to give them their meaning in common usage and give these regulations their 
most reasonable application/scope. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
A. “Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this 
chapter or a request for a variance. 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
B. “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on a community’s flood 
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an 
average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where 
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such 
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
C. “Area of special flooding hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community 
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be 
designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking 
has been completed in preparation for publication of flood insurance rate map, Zone A 
usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, 
AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special 
flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood 
hazard.” 
D. “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or 
exceeded in any given year. 
E. “Basement” means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) 
on all sides. 
F. “Below-grade crawl space” means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in 
which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade 
and the height – measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the 
crawlspace foundation – does not exceed four feet at any point. 
G. “Breakaway wall” means a wall not part of the structural support of a building and is 
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading 
forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting 
foundation system. 
H. “City” means the city of Fairview, Oregon. 
I. “Council” or “city council” means the Fairview city council or such person(s) or 
entity(ies) designated by that body to perform the appeal or variance review functions given 
it by the terms of this chapter. 
J. “Critical facility” means a facility where a slight chance of flooding may be too great. 
Critical facilities include: 
1. Schools; 
2. Nursing homes; 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
3. Hospitals; 
4. Police, fire and other emergency response installations; and 
5. Installations producing, using or storing hazardous materials or waste. 
K. “Director” means the city’s community development director or designate. 
L. “DEQ” means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
M. “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real property, 
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, 
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
N. “DLCD” means the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development. 
O. “Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has 
its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, 
piers, pilings, or columns. 
P. Flood or Flooding. 
1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry 
land areas from: 
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any 
source. 
c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined 
in subsection (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing 
mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a 
current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water 
as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding 
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a 
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of 
nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual 
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)(a) of this 
definition. 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
Q. “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means an official map of a community, on which the 
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and 
the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
R. “Flood insurance study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood 
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, 
evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion 
hazards. 
S. “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land 
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively 
increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height (one foot). 
T. “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building 
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s 
lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in 
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of these regulations. 
U. “Manufactured dwelling” means a structure transportable in one or more sections built 
on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation 
when attached to required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” does not include a 
“recreational vehicle.” The term “manufactured dwelling” is synonymous with the term 
“manufactured home.” 
V. “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of 
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
W. “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” 
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted 
by a community and includes any subsequent improvement to such structures. 
X. “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is: 
1. Built on a single chassis; 
2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal 
projection; 
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living 
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
Y. “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the 
building permit was lawfully issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent 
construction of a structure on construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of 
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond 
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and 
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include 
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary 
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as 
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a 
“substantial improvement,” the actual start of construction means the first alteration of 
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration 
affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Z. “State building code” means the combined specialty codes. 
AA. “Structure” means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed 
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a 
manufactured dwelling. 
BB. “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby 
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
CC. “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or 
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the 
market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This 
term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the 
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or 
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the 
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe 
living conditions; or 
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude 
the structure’s designation as a “historic structure.” 
DD. “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain 
management regulation. 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
EE. “Water dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in 
any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its 
operations. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1)) 
19.105.030 General provisions. 
A. This chapter applies to all areas of “special flood hazards” within the city as described in 
subsection (B) of this section. 
B. The areas of “special flood hazard” are those areas identified by the Federal Insurance 
Administration in a report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the Multnomah County, 
Oregon and Incorporated Areas” (dated February 1, 2019; hereinafter “study”) along with 
accompanying FIRMs. Those documents are adopted by reference and declared to be part 
of this chapter. A copy of the maps and study are on file in the office of the public works 
director. The best available information for flood hazard area identification shall be the 
basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued. 
C. No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered 
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter. The city may seek any remedy 
lawfully available to it to effect compliance and, in the event the city is compelled to seek 
judicial redress for violation(s) of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover its 
reasonable attorneys and expert witness fees both at trial and on appeal. 
D. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair existing easements, 
covenants or deed restrictions. Where these regulations and another local, state or federal 
law conflict, the more restrictive shall control. 
E. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining 
portions hereof. 
F. These regulations shall be considered minimum requirements, liberally construed in 
favor of the city, and not deemed to either limit or repeal any other powers granted the city 
by state or federal law or its inherent plenary powers. 
G. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for 
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger 
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade 
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood 
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, 
or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 
1)) 
19.105.040 Administration. 
A. Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained prior to 
construction or development within any area of special flood hazard. The permit shall be 
for all structures and development as defined in FMC 19.105.020. 
B. Application for Development Permit. Application(s) for a development permit shall be on 
forms furnished by the city, submitted to the director, and include plans in duplicate drawn 
to scale showing: 
1. The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the development area; 
2. Existing and/or proposed structures; 
3. Fill; 
4. Storage of materials; and 
5. Drainage facilities. 
6. In addition to the foregoing, the following information is to be provided on the plans 
at the time application is made: 
a. Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures in relation to 
mean sea level; 
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of flood-proofing in any structure; 
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or Oregon licensed architect 
that flood-proofing methods for nonresidential structure(s) meet the requirements 
set out in FMC 19.105.070(A)(2); and 
d. Description of the extent (if any) to which a watercourse may be altered as a 
result of the development. 
C. Designation and Duties of Floodplain Administrator. The director is hereby appointed to 
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit 
applications with its provisions; duties include (but are not limited to) the following: 
1. Review of all development permit applications and all resulting permits to ensure 
compliance with requirements imposed by this chapter; 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
2. Determine whether appropriate federal, state, and/or local regulatory permits have 
been obtained; 
3. Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter for public inspection; 
4. Notify adjacent communities, DLCD, and other appropriate state and federal 
agencies prior to the alteration/relocation of a watercourse and cause the submission 
of evidence thereof to the Federal Insurance Administration as well as requiring that 
maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so 
that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
5. Make interpretations as to the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas 
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and 
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal; 
6. Determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If the proposed 
development is located in a floodway, ensure the appropriate provisions of FMC 
19.105.070 are met; 
7. When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A and V zones), the 
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood 
elevation and floodway data available from federal, state, or other sources in order to 
administer FMC 19.105.070; 
8. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, 
FIRM, or otherwise, the director shall obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation 
to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements and below grade 
crawlspaces) of all new or substantially improved structures and whether the structure 
contains a basement; 
9. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures where base flood 
elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or as required in 
this section; 
a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and 
b. Maintain flood-proofing certifications required by this section; 
10. Provide to building officials the base flood elevation and freeboard applicable to 
any building requiring a building permit; and 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
11. Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed 
development qualifies as a substantial improvement under this chapter. 
D. Requirement to Submit New Technical Data. 
1. Notify FEMA within six months of project completion when an applicant has 
obtained a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA, or when 
development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain boundaries, or modified base 
flood elevations. This notification shall be provided as a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
2. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing technical data to support the LOMR 
application and paying any processing application fees to FEMA. 
3. Upon occurrence, notify the administrator in writing whenever the boundaries of the 
community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise 
assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management 
regulations for a particular area. In order that all FHBMs and FIRMs accurately 
represent the community’s boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a 
map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate 
limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain 
management regulatory authority. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1)) 
19.105.050 Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted conditionally in accordance with the specific and general 
standards outlined in this chapter: 
A. All uses allowed in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone.  
B. Excavation and fill required to plant any new trees or vegetation. 
C. Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian areas, upland and streams. (Ord. 2-
2019 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.060) 
19.105.060 Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted: 
A. Any use otherwise prohibited in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone. 
B. Any uncontained area of hazardous materials as defined by DEQ. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 
1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.070) 
19.105.070 General standards for flood hazard reduction. 
A. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following is required: 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
1. Anchoring. 
a. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be anchored to 
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; and 
b. All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or 
lateral movement and installed using methods and practices designed to minimize 
flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of 
overthe-top or frame ties to ground anchors (see FEMA’s “Manufactured Home 
Installation in Flood Hazard Areas”). 
2. Construction Materials and Methods. 
a. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be constructed with 
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b. All new construction and substantial improvement(s) shall be constructed using 
methods and practices designed to minimize flood damage; and 
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning and other service 
equipment/facilities shall be designed and/or elevated or located to prevent water 
from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding. 
3. Utilities. 
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or 
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or 
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the 
systems into flood waters; and 
c. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or 
contamination from them during flooding consistent with rules adopted by DEO. 
4. Subdivision Proposals. 
a. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood 
damage; 
b. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities/facilities such as sewer, gas, 
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate 
flood damage; 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
c. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce 
exposure to flood damage; and 
d. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided nor available from an 
authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other 
proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is 
less. 
5. Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is unavailable through the flood 
insurance study, FIRM or other authoritative source, building permit applications shall 
be reviewed with the aim of promoting safety from flooding. Use of historical data, high 
water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc. should be used where available. 
Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones may result in higher 
insurance rates. 
6. AH Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on 
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B. In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided 
(Zones A1-30, AH, AE, and A), the following requirements are to be met: 
1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any 
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a 
minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation. Fully enclosed areas subject to 
flooding below the lowest floor are either prohibited or to be designed to automatically 
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of 
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be certified by an Oregon 
registered/licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following 
minimum criteria: 
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square 
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; 
provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and 
d. If a building has more than one enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area 
shall be equipped with adequate flood openings. 
2. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and/or substantial improvement of 
any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base flood elevation or, 
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a. Be flood-proofed such that below the base flood level, the structure is watertight 
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c. Be certified by a Oregon registered professional engineer or architect that the 
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of 
practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development 
and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. 
3. Elevated Nonresidential Structures. All elevated nonresidential structures not flood 
proofed and with space below the lowest floor are either prohibited or must be 
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by 
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement 
must be certified by an Oregon registered/licensed professional engineer or architect 
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square 
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; 
provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; and 
d. If a building has more than one enclosed area below the lowest floor, each area 
shall be equipped with adequate flood openings. 
4. Persons flood-proofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood 
insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood-proofed 
level (e.g., a building flood-proofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot 
below.) 
5. Manufactured Dwellings. 
a. Manufactured dwellings supported on solid foundation walls shall be 
constructed with flood openings that comply with subsection (B)(1) of this section; 
b. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or above the BFE; 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
c. The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and 
lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are 
not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference 
FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for 
additional techniques); and 
d. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE. 
6. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites in special flood hazard 
zones are required to: 
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
b. Be licensed and ready for highway use on its wheels or jacking system and 
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and security devices; and 
c. Have no permanently attached additions; or, alternatively, 
d. Meet the requirements for manufactured dwellings in subsection (B)(5) of this 
section, including but not limited to the elevation and anchoring requirements for 
manufactured dwellings. 
7. Below-Grade Crawlspaces. Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to 
standards found in FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 11-01, “Crawlspace Construction for 
Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas”: 
a. The building must be designed and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and 
lateral movement as a result of hydrodynamic and/or hydrostatic loads, including 
the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can be 
addressed through openings described below. 
b. Crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater 
than five feet per second unless designed by an Oregon registered/licensed 
architect or professional engineer. 
c. The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and 
must have openings equalizing hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic 
entry and exit of floodwaters with the bottom of each flood vent opening no more 
than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
d. Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials 
resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the 
crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to 
elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE. 
e. Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE 
or designed so floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system 
components. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or 
sealed from floodwaters. 
f. The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet 
below the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 
g. The height of the below-grade crawlspace measured from the interior grade of 
the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall must not exceed four 
feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall 
height according to the engineering analysis and building code requirements for 
flood hazard areas. 
h. There must be a drainage system providing for removal of floodwaters from the 
interior area of the crawlspace such that the area is drained within a reasonable 
time after a flood event. The system will vary as a result of the site gradient and 
other drainage characteristics. Possible options include natural drainage through 
porous, well-drained soils and installation of drainage systems such as perforated 
pipes, drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone top allowing for drainage by gravity or 
mechanical means. 
i. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for 
any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation 
types should be used. 
For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01. 
8. Floodway Not Established. Where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, 
no new construction, substantial improvement(s) or other development (including fill) 
is permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the city’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated 
that the cumulative effect(s) of the proposed development, when combined with other 
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of 
the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
9. Floodway Established. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas 
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the 
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, 
the following provisions apply to areas designated as floodways: 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
a. No encroachments (including fill), new construction, substantial 
improvement(s) and other development shall occur unless certification by a 
registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic 
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering 
practice that encroachments will not result in any increase in base flood or 
floodway elevations during a base flood discharge. 
b. If subsection (B)(9)(a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and 
substantial improvement(s) shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction 
provisions. 
c. Manufactured dwellings may be located in floodways only under the following 
circumstances: 
i. If there is an existing manufactured dwelling, placement was permitted at the 
time of the original installation and its continued use is not a threat to life, 
health, property, or the general welfare of the public; or 
ii. A new manufactured dwelling is replacing an existing one where the original 
placement was permitted at the time and the replacement will not be a threat to 
life, health, property or the general welfare of the public; and 
iii. The location of the dwelling meets all the following: 
(A) Demonstration that the manufactured dwelling and any accessory 
building(s), structure(s) or other improvement(s) will not result in any 
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a base flood discharge; 
(B) The replacement dwelling and any accessory building(s)/structure(s) 
are elevated so that the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam is 
at or above the BFE; 
(C) The replacement dwelling is placed, anchored and secured to a 
foundation support system designed by an Oregon professional engineer or 
architect and approved by the city; 
(D) The replacement dwelling, its foundation supports and any accessory 
building(s)/structure(s) or property improvement(s) do not displace water 
so as to cause a rise in water level or divert water in a manner likely to 
cause erosion/damage to other properties; 
(E) The replacement dwelling is appropriately zoned; and 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
(F) Location of the replacement dwelling will not violate any other local, 
state or federal law. 
10. Shallow Flooding Areas. The following restrictions apply in shallow flooding areas: 
a. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and 
manufactured homes shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 
above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the 
depth number specified on the FIRM and at least two feet if no depth number is 
specified. 
b. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures 
shall either: 
i. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest 
adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number 
specified on the FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
ii. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely 
floodproofed to or above that level such that any space below that level is 
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and 
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, 
compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
c. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide 
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
d. Recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, 
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, 
and have no permanently attached additions; or 
iii. Meet the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured dwellings 
set out above. 
11. Critical Facilities. 
a. Construction of new critical facilities shall, to the extent possible, be located 
outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
b. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no 
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA 
shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above BFE or to the height of the 500-
year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the facility should be protected 
to the height noted. Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure 
that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access 
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided 
to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1)) 
19.105.080 Variance and appeal procedure. 
All variance requests are processed by the city according to the specifications set forth 
below. 
A. The planning commission shall hear and decide requests for variances from the 
requirements of this chapter. 
B. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any 
requirement, decision or determination by the planning commission in the enforcement or 
administration of this chapter. 
C. Those aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission who have standing in the 
land use procedure may appeal such decision to the city council. 
D. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may 
be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 
one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures 
constructed below the base flood level, providing items listed in subsections E to N of this 
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification for 
issuing the variance increases. 
E. In reviewing an application for variance to the floodplain standards, the planning 
commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards 
specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3. The susceptibility of any proposed development and its contents to flood damage 
and the impact of such damage on the owner(s) thereof; 
4. The importance of services provided by the proposed development facility to the city 
and community; 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6. The availability of alternative location(s) for the proposed use not subject to flooding 
or erosion damage; 
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain 
management program for that area; 
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency 
vehicles; 
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the 
flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, 
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, 
electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
F. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of 
structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of 
Historic Properties, without regard to procedures set forth in this section, upon a 
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s 
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary 
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
G. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood 
levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
H. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum 
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
I. Variances will only be issued upon: 
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional 
hardship to the applicant; and 
3. A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood 
heights, additional threat(s) to public safety, extraordinary public expense, creation of 
a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public nor otherwise conflict with 
existing local laws or regulations. 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
J. Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the 
general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not 
personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or 
financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential 
neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare. 
K. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to 
allow a lesser degree of flood-proofing than watertight or dry flood-proofing where it can be 
determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other 
variance criteria except subsection D of this section and otherwise complies with FMC 
19.105.070. 
L. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the 
structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood 
elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased 
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
M. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection E of this section, the planning 
commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems 
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
N. The local floodplain administrator/director shall maintain records of all written notices, 
appeal actions, variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and shall report 
such variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 
(Exh. 1)) 
  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
19.105.010 STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS  
 
A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION The State of Oregon has in ORS 197.175 delegated the 
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management 
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its 
citizenry. Therefore, the Fairview does ordain as follows:  
 
B. FINDINGS OF FACT  
1. The flood hazard areas of Fairview are subject to periodic inundation which may 
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of 
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for 
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which 
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.  
2. These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in 
special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and velocities, and 
when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are 
inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood 
damage also contribute to flood loss.  
 
C. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, 
safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding 
in flood hazard areas by provisions designed to:  
1. Protect human life and health;  
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;  
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and 
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;  
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;  
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; 
electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in special 
flood hazard areas;  
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and 
development of flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by 
flooding;  
7. Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard area  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
8. Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume 
responsibility for their actions  
9. Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief.  
 
D. METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES. In order to accomplish its purposes, this 
ordinance includes methods and provisions for:  
1. Restricting or prohibiting development which is dangerous to health, safety, 
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging 
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;  
2. Requiring that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities which 
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial 
construction;  
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural 
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;  
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may 
increase flood damage;  
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will 
unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.  
  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
19.105.020 DEFINITIONS  
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be 
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage.  
 
A. Appeal: A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this 
ordinance or a request for a variance.  
B. Area of shallow flooding: A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a 
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater 
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a 
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is 
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is 
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.  
C. Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community 
subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is 
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, 
A99, AR (V, V1-30, VE). “Special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning 
and definition with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.  
D. Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or 
exceeded in any given year.  
E. Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to 
rise during the base flood.  
F. Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground 
level) on all sides.  
G. Below-grade crawl space: means an enclosed area below the base flood 
elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest 
adjacent exterior grade and the height – measured from the interior grade of the 
crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation – does not exceed four feet 
at any point. 
H. Breakaway wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building 
and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific 
lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the 
building or supporting foundation system.  
I. City: means the city of Fairview, Oregon. 
J. Council or city council: means the Fairview city council or such person(s) or 
entity(ies) designated by that body to perform the appeal or variance review 
functions given it by the terms of this chapter. 
K. Critical facility: means a facility where a slight chance of flooding may be too 
great. Critical facilities include: schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
and other emergency response installations; and installations producing, using 
or storing hazardous materials or waste. 
L. DEQ: means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. 
M. Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, 
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, 
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of 
equipment or materials.  
N. Director: means the city’s community development director or designate. 
O. DLCD: means the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development. 
P. Elevated building: means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building 
which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation 
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Q. Flood or Flooding:  
1. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of 
normally dry land areas from:  
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.  
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters 
from any source.  
c. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by 
flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are 
akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of 
normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of 
water and deposited along the path of the current. 
2. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other 
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or 
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly 
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, 
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, 
such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly 
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.  
R. Flood elevation study: See “Flood Insurance Study”.  
S. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community, on which 
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard 
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that 
has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map 
(DFIRM).  
T. Flood Insurance Study (FIS): An examination, evaluation and determination of 
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) 
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.  
U. Flood proofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, 
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood 
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, 
structures, and their contents.  
V. Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land 
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without 
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated 
height. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway."  
W. Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose 
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes 
only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and 
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, 
and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.  
X. Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface 
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.  
Y. Historic structure: Any structure that is:  
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing 
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by 
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual 
listing on the National Register;  
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a 
registered historic district;  
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with 
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the 
Secretary of Interior; or  
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities 
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:  
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of 
the Interior or  
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without 
approved programs.  
Z. Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including 
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for 
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement 
area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this ordinance.  
AA. Manufactured dwelling: A structure, transportable in one or more 
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or 
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The 
term "manufactured dwelling" does not include a "recreational vehicle" and is 
synonymous with “manufactured home”.  
BB.  Manufactured dwelling park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous 
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or 
sale.  
CC. Mean sea level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which 
Base Flood Elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are 
referenced.  
DD. New construction: For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” 
means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after 
the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by Fairview 
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.  
EE. Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is:  
1. Built on a single chassis;  
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal 
projection;  
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty 
truck; and  
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary 
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.  
FF. Special flood hazard area: See “Area of special flood hazard” for this definition.  
GG. Start of construction: Includes substantial improvement and means the date 
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, 
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other 
improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start 
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a 
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the 
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the 
placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent 
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and 
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does 
it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the 
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling 
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the 
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, 
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the 
external dimensions of the building.  
HH. State building code: means the combined specialty codes. 
II. Structure: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, 
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well 
as a manufactured dwelling.  
JJ. Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby 
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal 
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage 
occurred.  
KK. Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, 
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 
percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" 
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred 
"substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term 
does not, however, include either:  
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations 
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which 
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which 
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or  
2. Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will 
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic 
structure.”  
LL. Variance: A grant of relief by Fairview from the terms of a flood plain 
management regulation.  
MM. Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant 
with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other 
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other 
evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in 
violation until such time as that documentation is provided 
NN. Water dependent: means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot 
exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the 
intrinsic nature of its operations 
 
 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
19.105.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS  
A. LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES. This ordinance shall apply to all 
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of Fairview.  
B. BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. The special flood 
hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance Administrator in a scientific and 
engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Multnomah 
County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas, dated February 1, 2019, with 
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) are hereby adopted by 
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The FIS and FIRM panels are 
on file at the office of the Public Works Department. 
C. COORDINATION WITH STATE OF OREGON SPECIALTY CODES Pursuant to the 
requirement established in ORS 455 that the City of Fairview administers and 
enforces the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the City of Fairview does hereby 
acknowledge that the Oregon Specialty Codes contain certain provisions that 
apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located in special 
flood hazard areas. Therefore, this ordinance is intended to be administered and 
enforced in conjunction with the Oregon Specialty Codes.  
D. COMPLIANCE AND PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE  
1. COMPLIANCE All development within special flood hazard areas is subject 
to the terms of this ordinance and required to comply with its provisions and 
all other applicable regulations.  
2. PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE No structure or land shall hereafter be 
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full 
compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable 
regulations. Violations of the provisions of this ordinance by failure to 
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and 
safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a 
(INSERT INFRACTION TYPE (I.E. MISDEMEANOR). INSERT PENALTIES PER 
STATE/LOCAL LAW ASSOCIATED WITH SPECIFIED INFRACTION TYPE (I.E. 
ANY PERSON WHO VIOLATES THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ORDINANCE 
SHALL UPON CONVICTION THEREOF BE FINED NOT MORE THAN A 
SPECIFIED AMOUNT OF MONEY…) Nothing contained herein shall prevent 
the City of Fairview from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to 
prevent or remedy any violation.  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
E. ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY  
1. ABROGATION This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair 
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where 
this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed 
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent 
restrictions shall prevail.  
2. SEVERABILITY This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby 
declared to be severable. If any section clause, sentence, or phrase of the 
Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of 
competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity 
of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
F. INTERPRETATION In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all 
provisions shall be:  
1. Considered as minimum requirements;  
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and  
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state 
statutes.  
G. WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY  
1. WARNING. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is 
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific 
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare 
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. 
This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood 
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or 
flood damages.  
2. DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. This ordinance shall not create liability on the 
part of the City of Fairview, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal 
Insurance Administrator for any flood damages that result from reliance on 
this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.  
  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
19.105.040 ADMINISTRATION  
A. DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager or their 
designee is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this 
ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its 
provisions. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate authority to implement 
these provisions. 
B. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. Duties 
of the floodplain administrator, or their designee, shall include, but not be 
limited to: 
1. PERMIT REVIEW. Review all development permits to determine that:  
a. The permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;  
b. All other required local, state, and federal permits have been 
obtained and approved.  
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed 
development is located in a floodway. If located in the floodway 
assure that the floodway provisions of this ordinance in FMC 
19.105.070(B)(5) are met; and  
d. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed 
development is located in an area where Base Flood Elevation 
(BFE) data is available either through the Flood Insurance Study 
(FIS) or from another authoritative source. If BFE data is not 
available then ensure compliance with the provisions of FMC 
19.105.070(A)(7); and  
e. Provide to building officials the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) 
applicable to any building requiring a development permit.  
f. Review all development permit applications to determine if the 
proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement 
as defined in FMC 19.105.020.  
g. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed 
development activity is a watercourse alteration. If a 
watercourse alteration is proposed, ensure compliance with the 
provisions in section FMC 19.105.070(A)(1).  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
h. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed 
development activity includes the placement of fill or 
excavation.  
2. INFORMATION TO BE OBTAINED AND MAINTAINED The following 
information shall be obtained and maintained and shall be made 
available for public inspection as needed:  
a. Obtain, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to 
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements) and all 
attendant utilities of all new or substantially improved 
structures where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided 
through the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), Flood Insurance Rate 
Map (FIRM), or obtained in accordance with FMC 
19.105.070(A)(7).  
b. Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of 
the natural grade of the building site for a structure prior to the 
start of construction and the placement of any fill and ensure 
that the requirements of FMC 19.105.070(B)(5) and FMC 
19.105.040(B)(1)(b) are adhered to. 
c. Upon placement of the lowest floor of a structure (including 
basement) but prior to further vertical construction, obtain 
documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional licensed 
surveyor or engineer, certifying the elevation (in relation to mean 
sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement).  
d. Where base flood elevation data are utilized, obtain As-built 
certification of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the 
lowest floor (including basement) prepared and sealed by a 
professional licensed surveyor or engineer, prior to the final 
inspection.  
e. Maintain all Elevation Certificates (EC) submitted to the 
community;  
f. Obtain, record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean 
sea level) to which the structure and all attendant utilities were 
floodproofed for all new or substantially improved floodproofed 
structures where allowed under this ordinance and where Base 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or 
obtained in accordance with section FMC 19.105.070(A)(7).  
g. Maintain all floodproofing certificates required under this 
ordinance;  
h. Record and maintain all variance actions, including justification 
for their issuance;  
i. Obtain and maintain all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses 
performed as required under FMC 19.105.070(B)(5).  
j. Record and maintain all Substantial Improvement and 
Substantial Damage calculations and determinations as 
required under section FMC 19.105.040(B)(6).  
k. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the 
provisions of this ordinance.  
3. REQUIREMENT TO NOTIFY OTHER ENTITIES AND SUBMIT NEW 
TECHNICAL DATA  
a. COMMUNITY BOUNDARY ALTERATIONS The Floodplain 
Administrator shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in 
writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been 
modified by annexation or the community has otherwise 
assumed authority or no longer has authority to adopt and 
enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular 
area, to ensure that all Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) and 
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) accurately represent the 
community’s boundaries. Include within such notification a 
copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, 
clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for 
which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain 
management regulatory authority. 
4. WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS Notify adjacent communities, the 
Department of Land Conservation and Development, and other 
appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any alteration or 
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to 
the Federal Insurance Administration. This notification shall be provided 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
by the applicant to the Federal Insurance Administration as a Letter of 
Map Revision (LOMR) along with either:  
a. proposed maintenance plan to assure the flood carrying 
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the 
watercourse is maintained; or 
b. Certification by a registered professional engineer that the 
project has been designed to retain its flood carrying capacity 
without periodic maintenance.  
The applicant shall be required to submit a Conditional Letter of Map 
Revision (CLOMR) when required under FMC 19.105.040(B)(5). Ensure 
compliance with all applicable requirements in FMC 19.105.040(B)(5) and 
FMC 19.105.070(A)(1)  
5. REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT NEW TECHNICAL DATA A community’s base 
flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical 
changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not 
later than six months after the date such information becomes available, 
a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the 
changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with 
Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Section 65.3. The 
community may require the applicant to submit such data and review 
fees required for compliance with this section through the applicable 
FEMA Letter of Map Change (LOMC) process.  
The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map 
Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:  
A. Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood 
elevation; and  
B. Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation 
by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base 
flood elevations but no floodway.  
An applicant shall notify FEMA within six (6) months of project 
completion when an applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA. This notification to FEMA shall be provided 
as a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).  
6. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE 
ASSESSMENTS AND DETERMINATIONS Conduct Substantial 
Improvement (SI) (as defined in FMC 19.105.020) reviews for all structural 
development proposal applications and maintain a record of SI 
calculations within permit files in accordance with FMC 19.105.040(B)(2). 
Conduct Substantial Damage (SD) (as defined in FMC 19.105.020) 
assessments when structures are damaged due to a natural hazard event 
or other causes. Make SD determinations whenever structures within the 
special flood hazard area (as established in FMC 19.105.030(B) are 
damaged to the extent that the cost of restoring the structure to its 
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the 
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.  
 
C. ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT  
1. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED A development permit 
shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any 
area horizontally within the special flood hazard area established in FMC 
19.105.030(B). The development permit shall be required for all 
structures, including manufactured dwellings, and for all other 
development, as defined in FMC 19.105.020, including fill and other 
development activities.  
2. APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT Application for a development 
permit may be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator 
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale 
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in 
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, 
drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the 
following information is required:  
a. In riverine flood zones, the proposed elevation (in relation to 
mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) and all 
attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
structures; in accordance with the requirements of FMC 
19.105.040(B)(2).  
b. In coastal flood zones (V zones and coastal A zones), the 
proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the bottom of 
the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding 
pilings and columns) of all structures, and whether such 
structures contain a basement;  
c. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any 
non-residential structure will be floodproofed. 
d. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect 
licensed in the State of Oregon that the floodproofing methods 
proposed for any non-residential structure meet the 
floodproofing criteria for non-residential structures in FMC 
19.105.070(B)(4)(c).  
e. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be 
altered or relocated.  
f. Base Flood Elevation data for subdivision proposals or other 
development when required per FMC 19.105.040(B)(1) and FMC 
19.105.070(A)(6).  
g. Substantial improvement calculation for any improvement, 
addition, reconstruction, renovation, or rehabilitation of an 
existing structure.  
h. The amount and location of any fill or excavation activities 
proposed.  
 
3. APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURE 
a. A Type I Procedure is required for: 
i. Any use in the underlying zoning district requiring a Type I 
Development review. 
ii. Any permitted use within the floodplain and a designated 
natural resource area that requires a Type I Natural 
Resource permit. See Table 19.106.040(B).  
b. A Type II Procedure is required for: 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
i. Any use in the underlying zoning district requiring a Type 
II Site Design review. 
ii. Any permitted use within the floodplain and a designated 
natural resource area that requires a Type II Natural 
Resource permit. See Table 19.106.040(B). 
c. A Type III Procedure is required for: 
i. Any use in the underlying zoning district requiring a Type 
III land use procedure. 
ii. Any permitted use within the floodplain and a designated 
natural resource area that requires a Type III Natural 
Resource permit. See Table 19.106.040(B). 
 
19.105.050 Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in accordance with the specific and general 
standards outlined in this chapter, and following the review procedures identified in 
19.105.040(C)(3): 
A. All uses allowed in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone.  
B. Excavation and fill required to plant any new trees or vegetation. 
C. Restoration or enhancement of floodplains, riparian areas, upland and 
streams. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 (Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.060) 
 
19.105.060 Prohibited uses. 
 
The following uses are not permitted: 
A. Any use otherwise prohibited in the base zone or existing flood hazard overlay zone. 
B. Any uncontained area of hazardous materials as defined by DEQ. (Ord. 2-2019 § 2 
(Exh. 1); Ord. 6-2001 § 1. Formerly 19.105.070) 
 
 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
19.105.070 General standards for flood hazard reduction 
A. GENERAL STANDARDS In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards 
shall be adhered to:  
1. ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES Require that the flood carrying 
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is 
maintained. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or 
relocated portion of said watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying 
capacity is not diminished. Require compliance with FMC 
19.105.040(B)(4) and FMC 19.105.040(B)(5). 
2. ANCHORING  
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be 
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of 
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic 
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.  
b. All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored per FMC 
19.105.070(B)(4)(d). All manufactured dwellings shall be 
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and 
installed using methods and practices designed to minimize 
flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not 
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors 
(see FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard 
Areas”). 
3. CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS  
a. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be 
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to 
flood damage.  
b. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be 
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood 
damage.  
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning and 
other service equipment/facilities shall be designed and/or 
elevated or located to prevent water from entering or 
accumulating within the components during flooding. 
4. UTILITIES AND EQUIPMENT  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
a. WATER SUPPLY , SANITARY SEWER, AND ON-SITE WASTE 
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS  
i. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be 
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood 
waters into the system.  
ii. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be 
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood 
waters into the systems and discharge from the systems 
into flood waters.  
iii. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid 
impairment to them or contamination from them during 
flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of 
Environmental Quality.  
b. ELECTRICAL, MECHANICAL, PLUMBING, AND OTHER 
EQUIPMENT Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, 
plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and service 
facilities shall be elevated at or above the base flood level or 
shall be designed and installed to prevent water from entering or 
accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic 
and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of 
buoyancy, during conditions of flooding. In addition, electrical, 
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, 
and other equipment and service facilities shall:  
i. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement shall meet 
all the requirements of this section.  
5. TANKS 
a. Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, 
collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base 
flood.  
b. Above-ground tanks shall be installed at or above the base flood 
level or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and 
lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.  
6. SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS & OTHER PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
a. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new 
developments (including proposals for manufactured dwelling 
parks and subdivisions) greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, 
whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals, 
Base Flood Elevation data.  
b. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new 
developments (including proposals for manufactured dwelling 
parks and subdivisions) shall:  
i. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.  
ii. Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, 
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to 
minimize or eliminate flood damage.  
iii. Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to 
flood hazards.  
7. USE OF OTHER BASE FLOOD ELEVATION DATA When Base Flood Elevation 
data has not been provided in accordance with FMC 19.105.030(B) the 
local floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize 
any Base Flood Elevation data available from a federal, state, or other 
source, in order to administer FMC 19.105.070. All new subdivision 
proposals and other proposed new developments (including proposals 
for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) must meet the 
requirements of FMC 19.105.070(A)(6).  
 
Base Flood Elevations shall be determined for development proposals 
that are 5 acres or more in size or are 50 lots or more, whichever is lesser 
in any A zone that does not have an established base flood elevation. 
Development proposals located within a riverine unnumbered A Zone 
shall be reasonably safe from flooding; the test of reasonableness 
includes use of historical data, high water marks, FEMA provided Base 
Level Engineering data, and photographs of past flooding, etc., where 
available. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones 
may result in higher insurance rates. 
 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
8. STRUCTURES LOCATED IN MULTIPLE OR PARTIAL FLOOD ZONES In 
coordination with the State of Oregon Specialty Codes:  
a. When a structure is located in multiple flood zones on the 
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) the provisions 
for the more restrictive flood zone shall apply.  
b. When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard 
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new 
construction and substantial improvements.  
 
B. SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE (INCLUDING ALL NON-COASTAL) FLOOD 
ZONES These specific standards shall apply to all new construction and 
substantial improvements in addition to the General Standards contained in 
FMC 19.105.070(A) of this ordinance.  
1. FLOOD OPENINGS All new construction and substantial improvements 
with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) 
are subject to the following requirements. Enclosed areas below the 
Base Flood Elevation, including crawl spaces shall:  
a. Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces 
on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters;  
b. Be used solely for parking, storage, or building access;  
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or 
meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria: 1. A 
minimum of two openings,  
d. The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not less 
than one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, 
where the enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the 
enclosure walls,  
e. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot 
above grade.  
f. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or 
other coverings or devices provided that they shall allow the 
automatic flow of floodwater into and out of the enclosed areas 
and shall be accounted for in the determination of the net open 
area.  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
g. All additional higher standards for flood openings in the State of 
Oregon Residential Specialty Codes Section R322.2.2 shall be 
complied with when applicable.  
2. Attached garages may be constructed with the garage floor slab below 
the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) in riverine flood zones, if the following 
requirements are met: 1. If located within a floodway the proposed 
garage must comply with the requirements of FMC 19.105.070(B)(5).  
a. The floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;  
b. The garage is used solely for parking, building access, and/or 
storage;  
c. The garage is constructed with flood openings in compliance 
with FMC 19.105.070(B)(1) to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on 
exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of 
floodwater.  
d. The portions of the garage constructed below the BFE are 
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;  
e. The garage is constructed in compliance with the standards in 
FMC 19.105.070(A); and  
f. The garage is constructed with electrical, and other service 
facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from 
entering or accumulating within the components during 
conditions of the base flood.  
3. Detached garages must be constructed in compliance with the 
standards for appurtenant structures in FMC 19.105.070(4)(f) or non-
residential structures in FMC 19.105.070(4)(c) depending on the square 
footage of the garage.  
4. FOR RIVERINE (NON-COASTAL) SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WITH 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS In addition to the general standards listed in 
section FMC 19.105.070(A) the following specific standards shall apply in 
Riverine (non-coastal) special flood hazard areas with Base Flood 
Elevations (BFE): Zones A1-A30, AH, and AE. 
a. BEFORE REGULATORY FLOODWAY In areas where a regulatory 
floodway has not been designated, no new construction, 
substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the 
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), unless it is 
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed 
development, when combined with all other existing and 
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface 
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point 
within the community.  
b. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION  
i. New construction, conversion to, and substantial 
improvement of any residential structure shall have the 
lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). 
ii. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall comply with 
the flood opening requirements in FMC 19.105.070(B)(1).  
c. NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION  
i. New construction, conversion to, and substantial 
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-
residential structure shall: 1. Have the lowest floor, 
including basement elevated at or above the Base Flood 
Elevation (BFE); Or, together with attendant utility and 
sanitary facilities:  
a. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level 
the structure is watertight with walls substantially 
impermeable to the passage of water;  
b. Have structural components capable of resisting 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of 
buoyancy.  
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or 
architect that the design and methods of 
construction are in accordance with accepted 
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this 
section based on their development and/or review of 
the structural design, specifications and plans. Such 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain 
Administrator as set forth by FMC 19.105.040(B)(2).  
ii. Non-residential structures that are elevated, not 
floodproofed, shall comply with the standards for enclosed 
areas below the lowest floor in FMC 19.105.070(B)(1).  
iii. Applicants floodproofing non-residential buildings shall be 
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on 
rates that are one (1) foot below the floodproofed level (e.g. 
a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated 
as one (1) foot below.  
d.  MANUFACTURED DWELLINGS  
i. Manufactured dwellings to be placed (new or replacement) 
or substantially improved that are supported on solid 
foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings 
that comply with FMC 19.105.070(B)(1);  
ii. The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be 
at or above Base Flood Elevation;  
iii. Manufactured dwellings to be placed (new or replacement) 
or substantially improved shall be anchored to prevent 
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base 
flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited 
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors 
(Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in 
Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques), 
and;  
iv. Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 
twelve (12) inches above Base Flood Elevation (BFE).  
e. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES Recreational vehicles placed on sites 
are required to: 
i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, and  
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or 
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick 
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions; or  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
iii. Meet the requirements of FMC 19.105.070(B)(4)(d), 
including the anchoring and elevation requirements for 
manufactured dwellings.  
f. APPURTENANT (ACCESSORY) STRUCTURES Relief from elevation 
or floodproofing requirements for residential and non-
residential structures in Riverine (Non-Coastal) flood zones may 
be granted for appurtenant structures that meet the following 
requirements:  
i. Appurtenant structures located partially or entirely within 
the floodway must comply with requirements for 
development within a floodway found in FMC 
19.105.070(B)(5).  
ii. Appurtenant structures must only be used for parking, 
access, and/or storage and shall not be used for human 
habitation;  
iii. In compliance with State of Oregon Specialty Codes, 
appurtenant structures on properties that are zoned 
residential are limited to one-story structures less than 200 
square feet, or 400 square feet if the property is greater 
than two (2) acres in area and the proposed appurtenant 
structure will be located a minimum of 20 feet from all 
property lines. Appurtenant structures on properties that 
are zoned as non-residential are limited in size to 120 
square feet.  
iv. The portions of the appurtenant structure located below 
the Base Flood Elevation must be built using flood resistant 
materials;  
v. The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to 
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the 
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic 
loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions 
of the base flood.  
vi. The appurtenant structure must be designed and 
constructed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
walls and comply with the requirements for flood openings 
in FMC 19.105.070(B)(1);  
vii. Appurtenant structures shall be located and constructed to 
have low damage potential;  
viii. Appurtenant structures shall not be used to store toxic 
material, oil, or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant 
identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental 
Quality unless confined in a tank installed incompliance 
with FMC 19.105.070(A)(5).  
ix. Appurtenant structures shall be constructed with 
electrical, mechanical, and other service facilities located 
and installed so as to prevent water from entering or 
accumulating within the components during conditions of 
the base flood. 
5. FLOODWAYS Located within the special flood hazard areas established 
in FMC 19.105.030(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the 
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of the 
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion 
potential, the following provisions apply: 
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, 
substantial improvements, and other development within the 
adopted regulatory floodway unless: 
i. Certification by a registered professional civil engineer is 
provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic 
analyses performed in accordance with standard 
engineering practice that the proposed encroachment shall 
not result in any increase in flood levels within the 
community during the occurrence of the base flood 
discharge; or  
ii. A community may permit encroachments within the 
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an 
increase in base flood elevations, provided that a 
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is applied for 
and approved by the Federal Insurance Administrator, and 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
the requirements for such revision as established under 
Volume 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations, section 
65.12 are fulfilled.  
b. If the requirements of FMC 19.105.070(B)(5)(a) are satisfied, all 
new construction, substantial improvements, and other 
development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard 
reduction provisions of FMC 19.105.070.  
6. STANDARDS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS Shallow flooding areas 
appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations or as AH zones 
with Base Flood Elevations. For AO zones the base flood depths range 
from one (1) to three (3) feet above ground where a clearly defined 
channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable 
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is usually 
characterized as sheet flow. For both AO and AH zones, adequate 
drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide 
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.  
a. STANDARDS FOR AH ZONES Development within AH Zones must 
comply with the standards in FMC 19.105.070(A), FMC 
19.105.070(B), and (FMC 19.105.070(B)(6). 
b. STANDARDS FOR AO ZONES In AO zones, the following 
provisions apply in addition to the requirements in FMC 
19.105.070(A) and FMC 19.105.070(B)(6):  
i. New construction, conversion to, and substantial 
improvement of residential structures and manufactured 
dwellings within AO zones shall have the lowest floor, 
including basement, elevated above the highest grade 
adjacent to the building, at minimum to or above the depth 
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) 
(at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). For 
manufactured dwellings the lowest floor is considered to 
be the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam.  
ii. New construction, conversion to, and substantial 
improvements of non-residential structures within AO 
zones shall either:  
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
a. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated 
above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, 
at minimum to or above the depth number specified 
on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) (at least 
two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or  
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, 
be completely floodproofed to or above the depth 
number specified on the FIRM or a minimum of two 
(2) feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth 
number is specified, so that any space below that 
level is watertight with walls substantially 
impermeable to the passage of water and with 
structural components having the capability of 
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and 
the effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, 
compliance shall be certified by a registered 
professional engineer or architect. 
iii. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within AO Zones on 
the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) shall 
either:  
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 
and  
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its 
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only 
by quick disconnect type utilities and security 
devices, and has no permanently attached 
additions; or  
c. Meet the elevation requirements of FMC 
19.105.070.(B)(6)(b), and the anchoring and other 
requirements for manufactured dwellings of FMC 
19.105.070(B)(4)(d).  
iv. In AO zones, new and substantially improved appurtenant 
structures must comply with the standards in FMC 
19.105.070(4)(f). 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
In AO zones, enclosed areas beneath elevated structures shall comply with the 
requirements in FMC 19.105.070(B)(1). 
 
19.105.080 STANDARDS FOR PROTECTION OF SFHA FLOODPLAIN FUNCTIONS 
 
 
(1) Application for permit to develop in the special flood hazard area must include:  
 
(A) either: 
 
1. A statement confirming that the applicant has obtained a floodplain mitigation 
assessment of the proposed development performed by a qualified 
professional; 
 
2. A statement that, in addition to being subject to the consultation and biological 
opinion issued by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s 
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) for the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency’s implementation of the National Flood Insurance 
Program in Oregon (NMFS Consultation No. NWR-2011-3197), the development 
proposed by the application is a project or project action that is covered by 
another formal consultation with NMFS or the United States Fish and Wildlife 
Service, pursuant to Section 4(d), 7, or 10 of the Endangered Species Act of 
1973; 
 
3. A statement that the development proposed by the application fits within the 
nature and scope of the project types that are addressed in an existing full 
programmatic habitat assessment of all current and reasonably foreseeable 
future conditions; or 
 
4. A statement that the development proposed by the application is exempt from 
the requirement for a floodplain mitigation assessment because it is one or 
more of the following activities: 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
 
a. Normal maintenance, repairs, or remodeling of structures, such as re-
roofing and replacing siding, that does not (1) alter the footprint or expand 
the roof of the structure or (2) constitute a substantial improvement or 
repair of substantial damage (meaning the work must be less than 50 
percent of the market value of the structure(s)). 
 
b. Routine maintenance of public or private streets, sidewalks, paths and 
roads (including but not limited to filling potholes, repaving, and installing 
signs and traffic signals) that does not alter contours or culverts, that is 
less than six inches above grade, and that does not expand paved areas; 
 
c. Routine maintenance of landscaping that does not include grading, 
excavation, or filling; 
 
d. Routine agricultural practices such as tilling, plowing, harvesting, soil 
amendments, and ditch cleaning that does not alter the ditch 
configuration and that removes all spoils from the special flood hazard 
area or tills spoils into fields as a soil amendment; 
 
e. Routine silviculture practices (harvesting of trees), including hazardous 
fuels reduction and hazard tree removal with root balls left in place; 
 
f. Removal of noxious weeds and hazard trees or replacement of non-native 
vegetation with native vegetation;  
 
g. Normal maintenance of above and below ground utilities and facilities, 
such as replacing downed power lines and utility poles that does not result 
in a net change in footprint; 
 
h. Normal maintenance of a levee or other flood control facility prescribed in 
the operations and maintenance plan for the levee or flood control facility 
(this does not include repair from flood damage, expansion of the prism, 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
expansion of the face or toe or addition of protection on the face or toe 
with rock armor); 
 
i. Habitat restoration activities;  
 
j. Activities with the sole purpose of creating, restoring, or enhancing natural 
functions associated with floodplains, streams, lakes, estuaries, marine 
areas, habitat, and riparian areas, provided the activities meet federal and 
state standards and do not include structures, grading, fill, or impervious 
surfaces; 
 
k. Repair to onsite septic systems, provided ground disturbance is the 
minimal necessary and best management practices are utilized to prevent 
stormwater runoff and soil erosion; and 
 
l. Pre-emptive removal of documented susceptible trees to manage the 
spread of invasive species. 
 
(B) If the applicant has confirmed that it has obtained a floodplain mitigation 
assessment under (2)(i)(1) above, a statement confirming that the proposed 
development activities, as shown on the design plans and drawings submitted 
with the application, include measures to incorporate all mitigation identified 
in the floodplain mitigation assessment as needed for no net loss of floodplain 
functions. 
 
(2) The [city/county] will deny a permit to develop in the special flood hazard area 
unless the applicant submits a statement meeting the requirements of section 1. 
 
(3) For purposes of this Chapter: 
 
(A) “Floodplain functions” mean flood storage, water quality, and riparian 
vegetation conditions. 
 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
(B) A “floodplain mitigation assessment” is an assessment of the portions of a 
site that are within the special flood hazard area, performed by a qualified 
professional, that identifies existing site conditions before development 
occurs, describes the impact the proposed development would have on 
existing floodplain functions within the applicable portion of the existing 
site, and identifies the mitigation needed for the proposed development to 
result in no net loss of those floodplain functions.  The [city/cou nty] 
website includes the guidance prepared by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency for preparation of a floodplain mitigation assessment.   
 
(C) “No net loss” means adverse impacts to floodplain functions are avoided or 
offset so that there is no net change in the applicable floodplain functions 
from the existing condition when a development application is submitted to 
the [city/county], as further described in NMFS Consultation No. NWR-2011-
3197).  
 
(D) A “qualified professional” is a person who:  
 
1. Has a minimum of a bachelor’s degree in wildlife or fisheries habitat biology, 
or a related degree in a biological field from an accredited college or 
university with a minimum of four years’ experience as a practicing fish or 
wildlife habitat biologist; or  
 
2. Is listed on the Oregon Department of Transportation’s official list of 
consultants qualified to provide Endangered Species Act Documentation.   
 
(E) “Special flood hazard area” means the land in the floodplain within the 
[city/county] subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given 
year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, 
A1-30, AE, A99, AR. 
 
FMC 19.105.090 Variance and appeal procedure 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Flood 
insurance premium rates are determined by federal statute according to actuarial risk 
and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.  
A. CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES  
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial 
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size 
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures 
constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the 
provisions of FMC 19.105.090(3) and (5), and FMC 19.105.090(B). As the 
lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification 
required for issuing a variance increases.  
2. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is 
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.  
3. Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in flood 
levels during the base flood discharge would result.  
4. Variances shall only be issued upon:  
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;  
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in 
exceptional hardship to the applicant;  
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in 
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, 
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on 
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or 
ordinances.  
5. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and 
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the 
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of 
FMC 19.105.090(A)(2) – (4) are met, and the structure or other 
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages 
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.  
 
B. VARIANCE NOTIFICATION Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be 
given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure 
below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood 
 
Bold and underlined text is new language added to FMC 19.105 
Strikethrough text is language removed from FMC 19.105.  
  
 
insurance and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases 
risks to life and property. Such notification and a record of all variance actions, 
including justification for their issuance shall be maintained in accordance with 
FMC 19.105.090(B)(2). 
 