 
[5.0700]-1 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
SECTION 5.0700 
NATURAL RESOURCE OVERLAY 
General 
5.0701 Purpose 
5.0702 Coordination with Other Regulations 
5.0703 Applicability 
5.0704 Prohibitions 
5.0705 Exempt Uses and Activities 
5.0706 Permit Required 
5.0707 Application Requirements 
Standards 
5.0708 Tree Removal not Associated with Other Development 
5.0709 General Development Standards 
5.0710 Standards for Specific Development Types within a Resource Area 
5.0711 Mitigation Requirements 
Process 
5.0712 Alternative Review 
5.0713 Modification of NRO Standards 
5.0714 Mapping Protocols 
5.0715 Map Administration and Correction 
5.0716 Violations 
GENERAL  
5.07 01  PURPOSE    
The Natural Resource Overlay (NRO) regulations provides a framework for protection of Metro Titles and 13 
lands, and Statewide Planning Goal 5 and 6 resources within the City of Gresham. The NRO contributes to the 
following community objectives: 
A. Protect and restore streams and riparian areas for their ecological functions and as an amenity for the 
community and to recognize the unique natural resources attributes within the new communities of 
Pleasant Valley, Springwater and Kelley Creek. 
B. Protect floodplains and wetlands, and restore them for improved hydrology, flood protection, aquifer 
recharge, and habitat functions. 
C. Protect upland habitats and enhance connections between upland and riparian areas. 
 
[5.0700]-2 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
D. Maintain and enhance water quality and control erosion and sedimentation through the revegetation of 
disturbed sites and by placing limits on construction, impervious surfaces, and pollutant discharge in 
Resource Areas as defined in Section 5.0703(B)(1). 
E. Conserve scenic, recreational, and educational values of significant natural resources. 
F. Provide clear and objective standards and a discretionary review process, applicable to development in 
Resource Areas, in accordance with Statewide Land Use Planning Goal 5. 
G. Allow and encourage habitat-friendly development, while minimizing the impact on fish and wildlife 
habitat functions and mitigating the loss of ecological functions and values. 
5.0702  COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS   
A. The requirements of the NRO apply in addition to other applicable state, regional, and federal 
development requirements. Where the NRO imposes restrictions that are more stringent than other 
applicable state, regional and federal requirements, the provisions of the NRO shall govern. 
B. Except as provided below, where the provisions of this overlay conflict with comparable provisions of the 
Gresham Community Development Code, the more restrictive shall govern, provided that within the 
boundaries of a Resource Area, the tree removal and mitigation requirements of this overlay shall 
supersede those of Section 9.1000. 
C. Proposed development located near streams with regulated floodplains or identified flood prone areas 
shall also comply with the Floodplain Overlay District standards of Section 5.0100 of the Community 
Development Code. Areas affected by this District are shown on the City’s Special Purpose Districts Map. 
D. Proposed development located on or near sites with steeper slopes may also be affected by the Hillside 
and Geologic Risk Overlay (HGRO) provisions of Section 5.0200 of the Community Development Code. This 
Overlay may impose additional development requirements for sites with ravines and other sloped 
topographic features. Areas affected by this Overlay are shown on the City’s Special Purpose Districts Map. 
E. Development in or near wetlands and streams may require permits from the Oregon Department of State 
Lands (DSL) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If a federal permit is required, a water quality 
certification from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality may also be required. The City 
Manager shall notify the Department of State Lands and the Army Corps of Engineers when an application 
for development within streams and wetlands is submitted. Because these agencies may have more 
restrictive regulations than the City, Applicants are encouraged to contact them before they prepare their 
development plans. 
F. Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. Clarifications, commentary and examples are given in the 
Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. Content of the guidance manual is to be used in 
tandem with development code and does not substitute for, amend, or supersede development code. 
G. For the purposes of this section “land division” does not include middle housing land divisions pursuant to 
Section 6.0500 and “lot” does not include middle housing lots created by middle housing land divisions. 
 
 
 
 
[5.0700]-3 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
5.0703  APPLICABILITY   
A. All Areas 
1. Unless otherwise exempt, the Natural Resource Overlay and the regulations of this chapter apply to 
properties containing mapped Resource Areas or Potential Resources Areas when any of the following 
sues or activities are proposed: 
a. Development or redevelopment. 
b. All land divisions or property line adjustments. 
c. Removing, cutting, mowing, clearing, burning, or applying herbicides to vegetation. 
d. Changing topography, grading, excavating, stockpiling or filling. 
e. Resource enhancement. 
f. Construction or expansions of right-of-way improvements. 
g. Placement or stockpiling of wood debris. 
2. Mapped Resource Area (RA), High Value Resource Area (HVRA), and Potential Resource Area (PRA) 
boundaries are based on a GIS-supported application of the mapping protocols in Section 5.0714. The 
boundaries may be verified or amended in accordance with Section 5.0715. In general, these areas 
include the following: 
a. Resource Areas (RA) include regulated wetlands and their buffers, regulated streams and their 
buffers, other regulated waters including lakes and ponds and their buffers, and designated upland 
habitat. Within the RA are subareas of particularly high value. These subareas are designated as 
High Value Resource Areas (HVRA). All references in this chapter to Resource Areas shall be 
understood to include High Value Resource Areas.  
b. Potential Resource Areas (PRA) include areas that were identified as “potential wetlands” in a 
Local Wetland Inventory Survey and areas that have been identified as having a high probability of 
potential regulated wetlands but have not been reviewed as part of a Local Wetland Inventory 
Survey. 
3. Development within an RA in accordance with the provisions of the NRO shall not result in a change of 
the RA status of such developed areas on a property. 
4. Properties containing Potential Resource Areas are subject to Section 5.0703(B). If no Resource Areas 
are identified in the PRA review, then the requirements of NRO do not apply. 
5. All development permit applications within the NRO which propose non-exempt activities within 50 
feet of, but not within, a Resource Area, shall comply with Section 5.0706(A). 
6. Jurisdictional wetlands and waters are those subject to local, state, and/or federal authority. A 
jurisdictional wetland or stream identified during the course of a development permit review that 
meets the mapping protocols in Section 5.0714 shall be subject to the NRO standards. Such wetlands 
or streams shall be added to the NRO map by the Manager, after DSL and City concurrence. If a 
wetland or stream is identified that does not meet Title 3 criteria, it is not subject to the standards of 
this section but may still require a federal or state permit. 
B. Potential Resource Area (PRA) Determination. These regulations are required to protect water quality 
resources pursuant to Goal 6 and Metro Functional Plan Title 3. 
 
[5.0700]-4 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
1. Review. All applications for non-exempt uses and activities within areas designated as Potential 
Resource Areas on the map are subject to a review to determine whether Resource Areas (specifically 
wetlands) are present. 
a. The review shall cover all proposed disturbance area(s) and all on-site land within 100 feet of the 
disturbance area(s). 
b. The review may be processed separately as a Type I review or concurrently with another 
development permit. 
c. All wetland determinations must be conducted in accordance with the 1987 U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, including regional supplements and applicable guidance 
and any supporting technical guidance documents, rules, and regulations issued by the State of 
Oregon and the Oregon Department of State Lands. 
2. Submittal Requirements. In order to determine if the standards of this chapter apply the applicant 
shall submit a site assessment for review that includes a map of the proposed review area and 
identifies any proposed disturbance area(s) and on-site land within 100 feet of the disturbance area(s) 
as well as one of the following: 
a. Documentation from Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) that there is no wetland within the 
review area. Such documentation may be: 
i. A determination that a wetland is not present provided by DSL. 
ii. A determination that a wetland is not present conducted by a private wetland professional 
with DSL concurrence. 
b. Documentation from the City’s Natural Resources Program that there is no wetland within the 
review area. Such documentation may be: 
i. A determination that a wetland is not present conducted by the City. 
ii. Review and agreement with a determination that a wetland is not present that has been 
conducted by a private wetland professional. 
c. A wetland delineation with DSL concurrence or documentation from the City’s Natural Resources 
Program that there is a wetland, and a determination regarding Title 3 Wetland status performed 
by the City in accordance with the Department of Land Conservation and Development’s OAR 660-
023, including the application of the Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology 
(OFWAM) to the wetland. 
3. Determination of Resource Status. 
a. If no wetland is found the Resource Area standards of this Overlay shall not apply and the PRA 
shall be corrected according to 5.0715(C). 
b. If a wetland is found but is determined not to meet the City and Metro’s criteria for a regulated 
Title 3 wetland, it is not subject to the standards of this Overlay, but it may still require a federal or 
state permit. The PRA shall be corrected according to Section 5.0715(C). 
c. If a wetland is found and is determined to meet the City and Metro’s criteria for a regulated Title 3 
wetland, a buffer shall be applied, and the area shall be identified as Resource Area. Such Resource 
Areas shall be added to the NRO map in accordance with Section 5.0715(B) and the PRA shall be 
corrected according to Section 5.0715(C). 
 
[5.0700]-5 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
5.0704  PROHIBITIONS   
The following prohibitions apply within Resource Areas and within Potential Resource Areas that have not had 
a PRA review completed in accordance with Section 5.0703(B). These prohibitions do not apply to the 
continuation, in the same manner, of activities that were lawfully begun before January 15, 2021, were 
approved pursuant to this Overlay, or are exempt in accordance with Section 5.0705. An activity continuing in 
the same manner means that there is no expansion in the scope of that activity within the RA or PRA. 
A. Outside storage of materials and equipment. 
B. Any new gardens, lawns, structures, or development other than those allowed outright (exempted) or that 
is part of a regulated use that is approved with an NRO permit. 
C. The dumping of materials of any kind. 
D. Grading, placement of fill, or the removal of native vegetation other than those allowed outright 
(exempted) or that is part of a regulated use that is approved with an NRO permit. 
5.0705  EXEMPT USES AND ACTIVITIES   
The permit requirements of the NRO do not apply to the uses and activities listed in Subsection (A). The 
additional exemptions listed in Subsection (B) apply to all lands within the NRO except HVRAs. Where an 
exemption specifies an allowance of area for disturbance area, impervious surface, or improvement, that area 
represents the total cumulative amount allowed on a site pursuant to that exemption. The amount of 
disturbance area, impervious surface, or improvement permitted by each exemption shall be calculated 
independently. Nothing in this section shall allow activity prohibited in Section 5.0704. 
A. Exempt Uses and Activities. The following uses and activities are exempt from the permit requirements of 
the NRO: 
1. Change of ownership. 
2. The following activities within the PRA: 
a. Activities that do not otherwise require a development permit (i.e. no development permit would 
be required for the proposed activity outside of the NRO). 
b. Development within the boundaries of a current PRA review prepared in accordance with Section 
5.0703(B), where the assessment shows that no RA is present on the site. 
c. Development within the boundaries of a current PRA review prepared in accordance with Section 
5.0703(B), where the assessment shows that one or more RA are present on the site, but where 
the proposed development meets one or more of the exemptions for uses or activities within or 
near an RA. An NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
3. New site improvements, disturbance or structures or other development that are more than 50 feet 
from an RA. An NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
4. The removal of vegetation, including trees, in any of the following situations: 
a. When not within an RA. An NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C) 
when trees 24-inch DBH or greater in size will be removed within 50 feet of an RA. 
b. When removed in accordance with a City-approved mitigation or restoration plan. An NRO 
exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
 
[5.0700]-6 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
c. When limited to the removal of invasive vegetation (as identified on the City of Gresham Invasive 
Species List), and the removal of refuse or fill, provided that: 
i. All work is done using hand-held equipment; 
ii. No existing native vegetation is disturbed or removed. 
iii. All work occurs outside of wetlands and the tops of banks or streams; 
iv. No more than 200 square feet of area of ground is disturbed and the disturbed area is 
stabilized with new native vegetative cover prior to October 1 in any given year; and 
v. Up to 6 Invasive trees may be removed; however, if trees with the DBH of 6 inches or greater 
are proposed to be removed, an NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 
5.0705(C). 
5. Previously approved development as follows: 
a. A building permit for a phased development project for which the Applicant has previously met the 
application requirements, so long as the area of new construction was identified on the original 
permit and no new portion of the RA will be disturbed. 
b. On the individual lots where the location of the proposed improvements (disturbance area) was 
identified in the land division decision and the City’s mitigation requirements were completed as 
part of the land division for the entirety of the proposed disturbance area. 
6. Operation, maintenance, and repair of existing improvements when no additional incursion into the 
RA is proposed, including: 
a. Structures provided that the building footprint is not increased. 
b. Gardens, pastures, lawns and landscape perimeters, including the installation of new irrigation 
systems within existing gardens, pastures, lawns, and landscape perimeters, with the exception of 
the planting of any invasive plants listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List. 
c. Streets and roads, railroads, bridge footings, easements, and access roads and above-ground 
utilities. 
d. Subsurface utilities provided there are no above ground impacts or impacts to trees (e.g., damage 
to the root zone) within the RA. 
e. Manmade water control facilities such as outfalls, culverts, irrigation and drainage ditches, 
constructed ponds or lakes, wastewater facilities, and water quality facilities. 
7. Alteration and replacement of existing improvements when no additional incursion into the RA is 
proposed (including the uses and activities listed in Subsection (6)) provided an NRO exemption form 
is completed in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
8. The trenchless subsurface installation of new utilities (e.g., via microtunneling), provided there are no 
above ground impacts or impacts to trees (e.g., damage to the root zone) within the RA. An NRO 
exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
9. Existing farming practices as defined in ORS 215.203 and farm uses, excluding construction or 
expansion of buildings and structures. 
10. The maintenance of existing water-dependent uses that can only be carried out on, in, or adjacent to 
water because they require access to the water for waterborne transportation or recreation when no 
additional incursion into the RA is proposed. 
 
[5.0700]-7 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
11. Projects with the sole purpose of restoring or enhancing wetlands, streams, or fish and wildlife habitat 
areas, provided that the project is part of an approved local, state, or federal restoration or 
enhancement plan. An NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 5.0705(C). 
12. Planting of native vegetation. 
13. Work undertaken by Multnomah County Drainage District or its successor agency pursuant to ORS 
chapters 547 or 554 or Titles 33 or 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
14. Boundary and topographic surveys leaving no cut scars greater than three inches in diameter on trees. 
15. Development within an RA that is completely separated by an improved right-of-way from the water 
feature(s) which was the basis for the RA. This exemption only applies to RAs that are associated with 
a water feature (i.e., stream, wetland or other waters). It does not apply to upland habitat areas. See 
Section 5.0714, Mapping Protocols. An NRO exemption form is required in accordance with Section 
5.0705(C). 
16. Installation of fencing that meets the wildlife passage design standards in the Gresham Environmental 
Technical Guidance Manual. 
B. Additional Exemptions for All Areas except HVRAs. Except within mapped High Value Resource Areas, the 
following uses and activities are exempt from the permit requirements of the NRO provided that an NRO 
exemption form is completed in accordance with Section 5.0705(C): 
1. The alteration, expansion, or replacement of existing structures, provided that: 
a. The alteration, expansion, or replacement of a structure will not intrude more than 500 square 
feet into a mapped RA or PRA in addition to the area defined as the building footprint as of 
January 1, 2006. 
b. Where the RA is mapped, the new intrusion into the RA is no closer to the HVRA than the 
preexisting structure or improvement. 
2. Minor encroachments into the RA or PRA not to exceed 120 square feet of impervious surface such as 
accessory buildings, eave overhangs, exterior building improvements required to meet access and 
exiting requirements, or other similar features. 
3. Facilities that infiltrate stormwater onsite, including the associated piping, may be placed within the 
RA or PRA so long as the forest canopy and the areas within the Critical Root Zones of the trees are not 
disturbed. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, vegetated swales, rain gardens, vegetated 
filter strip, and vegetated infiltration basins. Only native vegetation may be planted in these facilities. 
4. Temporary and minor clearing not to exceed 200 square feet for the purpose of site investigations and 
pits for preparing soil profiles, provided that such areas are restored to their original condition when 
the investigation is complete. 
5. Low-impact outdoor recreation facilities for public use, including, but not limited to, multi-use paths, 
access ways, trails, picnic areas, or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks that may 
include benches and outdoor furniture, provided that the facility meets the following requirements: 
a. It contains less than 500 square feet of new impervious surface. This area represents the total 
cumulative amount of new impervious surfaces that shall be allowed on a site under this 
exemption. 
 
 
[5.0700]-8 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
b. Any trails shall be constructed using non-hazardous, pervious materials, with a maximum width of 
4 feet. 
c. Trees 24-inch DBH or larger shall not be removed and their critical root zones shall be protected. 
6. Using a single utility pole or where no more than 100 square feet of ground surface is disturbed above 
the ordinary high water mark of water bodies and where the disturbed area is restored to the 
preconstruction conditions. This area represents the total amount of disturbance area that shall be 
allowed for a utility project under this exemption (regardless of the number of parcels). 
C. NRO Exemption Form. When required by Subsection A or B, a written verification of exemption shall be 
obtained from the City prior to conducting exempt uses or activities. A completed form with a site plan 
showing location of work and location of RA(s) and/or PRA(s) on the site, a description of the work to be 
done, methods of protection (if any), and anticipated schedule of the work shall be submitted to the City a 
minimum of seven business days prior to the proposed activity. 
5.0706  PERMIT REQUIRED   
Unless exempt pursuant to Section 5.0705, a permit is required for all regulated activities within the NRO as 
follows: 
A. Proposed Uses and Activities within 50 feet of an RA. Applications for uses and activities that are proposed 
within 50 feet of an RA, but are not within an RA, are required to submit a scale map, site plan, and 
construction management plan in accordance with Section 5.0707(A) – (C). The construction management 
plan shall be processed under the Type I procedure and shall be approved by the Manager if the 
construction management plan provides measures to protect trees and other vegetation located within 
the RA as specified in Section 5.0707(C). 
B. Proposed Uses and Activities within an RA. The permit shall be processed under the development permit 
procedure and subject to the applicable standards specified in Table 5.0706-1 and the general 
requirements in Section 5.0709(A) and (B). All permit applications shall comply with the application 
requirements in Section 5.0707. 
C. Proposed Uses and Activities within a PRA. Applications for uses and activities that are proposed within a 
PRA are subject to the PRA review requirements in Section 5.0703(B). If Title 3 Wetlands are identified 
within the PRA, the permit requirements of Subsections (A) and (B) shall apply to such wetlands and 
buffers established in accordance with Section 5.0715(B). 
Table 5.0706- 1: Permit Procedure and Additional Applicable Standards for Development within 
an RA 
PROPOSED ACTIVITY OR REQUEST PERMIT PROCEDURE APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
PRA Review Type I 5.0703(B) 
Standards for Development in a RA 
Development of a Single Detached Dwelling or Middle 
Housing on a Lot of Record 
Type I 5.0710(A) 
Linear Utility Facilities Type I 5.0710(B) 
Non-Linear Utility Facilities other than Public 
Stormwater Facilities 
Type I 5.0710(C) 
 
[5.0700]-9 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
PROPOSED ACTIVITY OR REQUEST PERMIT PROCEDURE APPLICABLE STANDARDS 
Public Stormwater Facilities Type I 5.0710(D) 
Rights of Ways and Public Access Easements Type I 5.0710(E) 
Public Trails and Paths and Park Enhancements Type I 5.0710(F) 
Dangerous Tree Removal Type I 5.0708(A) 
Programmatic Tree Removal Type II 5.0708(B) 
Municipal Utility Facilities Type II 5.0710(G) 
Land Divisions Type II 5.0710(H)(1-8) 
Property Line Adjustment Type I 5.0710(H)(9) 
Other Development Activities in a RA (Other Than 
Those Activities Listed Above) 
Type I 5.0710(I) 
Other Reviews 
Request for Payment-in-Lieu of Mitigation Type II 5.0711(E) 
Alternative Review Type II 5.0712 
Map Correction Type I 5.0715(C) 
5.0707  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS   
Except as specified in Section 5.0708, all applications shall include the items required for the applicable 
procedure type in accordance with Article 11 and the items required by this section, and items specified in the 
Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual 
A. Existing Conditions Map. For the entire subject property, Applicants shall submit a scaled map of the 
property that includes: 
1. Location of all Potential Resource Areas, Resource Areas and High Value Resource Areas on the 
property. 
2. Outline of any existing disturbance area, including the location of existing adjacent streets and paved 
areas, utilities, culverts, stormwater management facilities, or bridges. 
3. Location of any known wetlands, waterways, or other waters on the property. 
4. Location of Floodplain Overlay and floodway boundary as defined by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA). 
5. Topography shown by contour lines. On properties that are two acres or larger, contours are only 
required for the portion of the property to be developed. 
6. If applicable, the boundaries of the Hillside and Geologic Risk Overlay. 
B. Proposed Site Plan. Detailed site plan of proposed development outlining total permanent and temporary 
disturbance area (including proposed building footprints, site property improvements, utilities, grading, 
and landscaping) and existing and proposed lot lines. 
C. Construction Management Plan (CMP). In order to ensure that trees and vegetation remain undisturbed 
within RAs and are not damaged during construction, the application shall include a construction 
management plan demonstrating either that all work impacts will take place outside of the RA or that 
work impacts within the RA will be within a proposed disturbance area and the application is in compliance 
with Section 5.0709(A). At a minimum, a construction management plan shall include the following 
 
[5.0700]-10 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
information: 
1. Location of site access and egress that construction equipment will use. 
2. Equipment and material staging and stockpile areas. 
3. Erosion and sediment control measures in accordance with the City of Gresham “Erosion Prevention 
and Sediment Control Manual” appendix of the Gresham Stormwater Management Manual. 
4. Critical Root Zone of all trees to be preserved within 50 feet of the disturbance (per Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual). 
5. Measures in accordance with the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual to protect trees 
and other vegetation located within the RA, other than those within a proposed disturbance area. 
6. A construction schedule that includes the timing of in-stream work (if applicable). In addition, the CMP 
must include a copy of written notification of the ODFW and NFMS notification. 
D. Additional Information Required. If any disturbance (permanent or temporary) is proposed within the RA, 
the following additional information shall be provided: 
1. Tree survey information: 
a. Detailed tree survey information including the location, diameter at breast height (DBH) and 
species of: 
i. Any tree greater than six inches (DBH) located within the disturbance area. 
ii. Any trees 24 inches or greater (DBH) located within 50 feet of the disturbance area. 
b. When all trees within 50 feet of the disturbance area are below 24 inches DBH, generalized tree 
survey Information including the approximate location and number of trees, their diameters and 
the dominant species may be allowed. 
c. If the Applicant is requesting tree removal on the basis that the tree(s) is on the City of Gresham 
Invasive Plant List, the identity of the species including in-focus, high resolution photographs 
supporting identification of species such as habitat, trunk, crown, flowers, fruits, branches, twigs, 
and leaves is required. 
d. If the Applicant is requesting tree removal on the basis that the tree(s) meets the definition of 
Dangerous Tree, an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) basic tree risk assessment prepared 
by a qualified arborist is required. 
2. A grading plan showing the proposed alteration of the ground. 
3. An outline of the disturbance area that identifies the vegetation to be removed. 
4. Narrative explanation and materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable 
development standards of Section 5.0709 and 5.0710. 
5. Mitigation plan showing plant location, spacing, species, and size at planting, maintenance plan and 
schedule, and monitoring plan prepared in accordance with Section 5.0711, unless payment-in-lieu of 
mitigation is proposed in accordance with Section 5.0711. 
E. In addition to the requirements of this section, additional applications requirements may apply as specified 
in the NRO (e.g., for Alternative Review). 
 
 
[5.0700]-11 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
STANDARDS  
5.0708  TREE REMOVAL NOT ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT   
The following standards apply to the removal of Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the City of Gresham 
Invasive Plant List within the RA that are not associated with other development or to programmatic permits 
for tree removal. The general standards in Section 5.0709(A) do not apply to tree removal subject to this 
section. Tree removal being proposed in conjunction with other development (e.g., a land division) shall be 
subject to the NRO standards applicable to that development rather than this section. 
A. Tree removal may be approved through the Type I process, when: 
1. One of the following criteria is met: 
a. The tree is identified as an invasive species and evidence regarding the species of the tree and the 
credentials of who identified it are included as part of the application. Applicants shall submit the 
information required by Section 5.0707(D)(1)(c). 
b. The tree meets the definition of Dangerous Tree and its removal is recommended by a qualified 
certified arborist who has-completed basic tree risk assessment for the tree. Applicants shall 
submit the information required by Section 5.0707(D)(1)(d). 
2. Proposals to remove a total of six of fewer trees (invasive species, and/or Dangerous Trees) are 
exempt from the submittal requirements in Section 5.0707, except as specified in Subsection (a). For 
all other proposals to remove such trees, other vegetation on the site must be protected in accordance 
with an approved construction management plan prepared pursuant to Section 5.0707(C) and a plan 
describing the methods of removal must be submitted. 
B. Tree removal may be approved through a Type II Programmatic Permit. Type II Programmatic Permits may 
only be obtained by Public Agencies and Utilities with a Gresham franchise license to allow for routine 
public facility or utility operation, repair and replacement, and/or on-going maintenance or enhancement 
programs. The purpose of a Programmatic Permit is to eliminate the need for individual tree removal 
permits for ongoing activities within the RA or HVRA. Programmatic permits do not cover tree protection, 
removal, planting, or mitigation associated with a development permit. 
1. Time Limits. The Manager may approve a Programmatic Permit for a period of up to two years. An 
annual report from the applicant on activity conducted under the permit is required to be submitted 
to the Manager by June 30 each year. Failure to submit the annual report will result in 
cancellation/suspension of the Programmatic Permit. 
2. Work Standards. All work conducted under a programmatic permit must be conducted in accordance 
with proper arboricultural practices as detailed in the most recent version of ANSI A300 standards. 
3. Review Factors. The Manager may approve a Programmatic Permit for work in the RA and HVRA upon 
finding that the following review factors are met or will be met with conditions: 
a. Biodiversity: The activities will result in the same or better native species diversity within each 
project area treated under the programmatic permit. 
b. Erosion Control: Activities will be planned to prevent exposed soil areas of greater than 500 square 
feet during the wet weather window of October 1 to May 1. 
 
 
[5.0700]-12 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
c. Mitigation of Impacts: The activities will protect or improve project area conditions as they relate 
to water quality, critical habitat protection, and forest health. 
d. Risk reduction: 
• Ignition fuel reduction at the private-public property interface shall occur before any 
additional coarse woody debris (CWD) is placed as part of stand management activities. 
• CWD shall be placed in a manner not likely to increase wildfire, slope movement, or public 
safety risks. 
• Plants not designated as fire accelerants on the Gresham Native Plant List will be preferred for 
retention in defined firebreak areas. 
• Plants designated as fire accelerants on the Gresham Native Plant List will not be planted in 
defined firebreak areas. 
• Suspended branch material is addressed as part of site activities. 
• Allowance for amount and location limitations for cut or chipped CWD are observed. 
• Snags or habitat tree retention is incorporated into project areas where retention of such 
features pose no risk to structures or active use areas. 
• Within areas mapped as past landslides or associated scarp flanks according to DOGAMI IMS-
57, a geotechnical review by a Certified Engineering Geologist or Geotechnical Engineer in 
advance of vegetation removal or deposition of CWD demonstrates the development will not 
cause negative impacts to on- and off-site geologic conditions, processes, or hazards. 
4. Application Requirements. The application requirements in Section 5.0707 do not apply. In addition to 
the requirements for a Type II application, an application for a programmatic permit shall include: 
a. A narrative description of proposed activities and locations and how the activities comply with the 
review factors above. 
b. A map of the areas work will occur, including generalized locations of each type of work. 
5. Permit Specifications. Approved permits issued by the City shall include the following specifications. 
The Manager may modify these specifications during the permit period in order to respond to public 
safety concerns, changes in regulations, or previously unforeseen issues, provided the applicant is 
notified in writing and provided an opportunity to appeal the change: 
a. Duration of permit. 
b. Geographic area covered by the permit. 
c. Permitted activities and any restrictions on the method, number, type, location or timing of 
activities. 
d. Procedures and thresholds for informing neighboring residents, businesses, and the City of 
upcoming permitted activities. 
e. Monitoring, performance tracking and reporting requirements. The Manager may prescribe rules 
or procedures that specify the manner in which such tracking and reporting occur. 
6. Revocation. The Manager may revoke a Programmatic Permit upon finding the applicant is not 
adhering to the limitations imposed or is acting beyond the activities permitted by the Programmatic 
Permit. Noncompliance with the Programmatic Permit may also be cause for any other enforcement 
action as stated in Section 5.0716. 
 
[5.0700]-13 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
5.0709  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS   
A. General Standards. The following standards apply to all regulated development within an RA. 
1. Mitigation is required for the removal of trees and other vegetation in accordance with Section 
5.0711. Trees listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List are exempt from this mitigation 
standard. Dangerous Trees are exempt from this mitigation standard but must be replaced at a ratio of 
one tree planted on site for each tree removed. 
2. All vegetation planted in an RA shall be native unless otherwise approved by the Manager based on 
the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
3. Fences are allowed only within an approved disturbance area unless the fencing meets the wildlife 
passage design in the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
4. Lighting within 50 feet of the RA shall be placed or shielded so it does not shine directly into the RA or 
must be motion activated. 
5. Temporary disturbance areas must be fully restored (see the Gresham Environmental Technical 
Guidance Manual). 
6. No fill or removal is allowed within a wetland, water body, or ordinary high water mark of a stream, 
unless all required permits are obtained from the US Army Corp of Engineers, and/or the Oregon 
Department of State Lands. 
7. Stream crossings, bridges, new culverts, and culvert expansions shall be designed in accordance with 
the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) fish passage criteria unless exempted or waived 
by ODFW. 
8. Any state or federally approved work that will take place in a regulated waterway shall be conducted 
during the specified in-water work period as determined by Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife 
for each specific water body. 
9. No parking beyond the minimum amount required in Sections 9.0850-9.0853 shall be allowed within 
the RA. This standard does not apply to single detached dwelling and middle housing development. 
10. During construction, the following standards apply: 
a. Trees in the RA shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing construction equipment. 
b. Erosion control measures shall be in place prior to and maintained throughout the construction. 
c. No stockpiling of soil or debris is allowed in the RA, except within an approved permanent or 
temporary disturbance area. 
d. Prior to construction, the RA that is to remain undeveloped shall be flagged, fenced, or otherwise 
marked and shall remain undisturbed. 
e. All construction activity on the property shall conform to the construction management plan 
described in Section 5.0707(C). 
f. Tree protection shall either include all of the following protective measures or be designed by a 
Certified Arborist: 
i. No soil compaction or removal of vegetation or tree branches shall occur within the Critical 
Root Zone. 
 
 
[5.0700]-14 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
ii. Prior to any grubbing, clearing, grading, parking, preparation or storage of materials or 
machinery, or other construction activity on the site, all trees to be protected on the project 
site and adjacent to the site shall be clearly identified and temporary fencing shall be installed 
at the perimeter of the Critical Root Zone. Protective fencing shall be of a material that cannot 
easily be moved, removed, or broken during construction activities. 
iii. No machinery repair, cleaning or fueling shall be performed within the Critical Root Zone of 
any trees identified for protection. 
iv. Digging a trench for placement of public or private utilities or other structure within the 
Critical Root Zone of a tree to be protected is prohibited. 
g. For any construction or grading within the Critical Root Zone of a tree to be protected, a Certified 
Arborist shall inspect tree protection measures before and after work is completed or be on site 
during any construction or grading activities. 
B. Methods for Avoiding Resource Areas. When development is proposed in the RA, an application may 
include the following habitat-friendly development practices to minimize the impact on the RA. 
1. When building on a lot containing RA, the minimum building setback of the base district may be 
reduced to any distance between the base district minimum and three feet, unless this reduction 
conflicts with applicable fire or life safety requirements or the requirements to maintain a clear vision 
area in accordance with Section 9.0200. 
2. The minimum percentage landscaping requirements, apart from those required for parking lots, street 
trees, buffers (Section 9.0100) and required mitigation areas, may be met by preserving the RA. 
3. Density Transfer. For the purposes of this section, development sites may include non-contiguous 
properties provided all of the properties that form the development site are within the same Natural 
Resource Overlay Subarea (i.e., Pleasant Valley, Springwater, Kelley Creek Headwaters, or all other 
areas within the City of Gresham). See Map 5.0714-1. Development may be transferred to no more 
than one non-contiguous property. On-site density transfer to avoid or minimize development shall be 
allowed within RA as follows: 
a. Single Detached Dwellings and Middle Housing Development Lot Transfer 
i. The number of lots in areas receiving lot transfers shall not exceed 125 percent of the lots that 
could be created for single detached dwellings at maximum density for the underlying zoning 
district. 
ii. A number of lots equal to no more than 50 percent of the minimum lots for single detached 
dwellings permitted on the undisturbed RA portion of the site may be transferred onto the 
non-RA portion of the development site. 
iii. The actual number of lots transferred shall be the lesser of the number of lots in i or ii above. 
iv. The transferred lots shall be in addition to the base number of dwelling units allowed in the 
applicable zoning district. 
b. Multi-family Development density transfer. 
i. The density in areas receiving density transfers shall not exceed 125 percent of the density 
allowed by the underlying subdistrict of the receiving area. 
 
 
[5.0700]-15 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
ii. A number of dwelling units equal to no more than 25 percent of the minimum density 
permitted on the undisturbed RA portion of the site is permitted to be transferred onto the 
non-RA portion of the development site. 
c. Commercial, Industrial, and Institutional Development Floor Area Transfer 
i. The floor area ratio in areas receiving FAR transfers shall not exceed 125 percent of the FAR for 
the underlying sub-district of the receiving area. 
ii. For density transfers in property developed as Commercial or Industrial, the transfer credit is 
10,000 square feet floor area ratio (FAR) per acre of undisturbed land within the RA. For 
developments that have no cap in FAR, the manager shall permit a reduction of the minimum 
parking requirement of up to 25 percent of the standard minimum parking requirement. This 
allowance is in addition to any other minimum parking reduction allowance provided in 
Section 9.0800. 
d. Within mixed-use developments the development transfer credit is factored using a combination 
of Subsections (a), (b), and (c), above, which shall be pro-rated based on the percentages of gross 
floor area (GFA) devoted to residential and non-residential uses. 
e. To accommodate the transferred density, lot dimensional standards, lot sizes, and minimum 
setbacks on the non-RA portion of the site may be reduced by no more than 20 percent. Applicants 
may use the landscaping reductions in Subsection (B)(2). 
f. All RA counted toward density transfer shall be permanently restricted from development and 
maintained for habitat functions, such as by making a public dedication, creating a separate tract 
and/or executing a restrictive easement. 
5.0710  STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT TYPES WITHIN A RESOURCE 
AREA   
A. Single detached and middle housing. In addition to the general standards in Section 5.0709(A), the 
following standards apply to the development of single detached dwellings and middle housing and 
related accessory structures and dwellings on existing legal lots of record. Applicants who cannot or 
choose not to comply with the standards of this section may apply for Alternative Review in accordance 
with Section 5.0712. 
1. The maximum disturbance area (permanent and temporary) allowed within the RA on a lot is 
determined by subtracting all portions of the lot outside the RA from 6,000 square feet. If there is 
6,000 square feet of contiguous land outside of the RA with a minimum dimension (at any point) of 40 
feet in either width or depth, all permanent and temporary disturbance must occur outside the RA. If 
there is not such a 6,000 square foot area outside the RA, encroachment into RA shall be limited to the 
amount of area needed to make up for the deficit. 
2. The entire disturbance area shall be entirely outside the HVRA. 
3. Of the 6,000 square feet maximum disturbance area permitted within the RA, no more than 4,000 
square feet shall be permanent disturbance area. The balance may be temporary disturbance area. 
4. Trees may be removed within the permanent disturbance area. Within the temporary disturbance 
area, no trees 24-inches DBH or larger shall be removed. If any part of the Critical Root Zone of a 24-
inch DBH or larger tree is within a proposed permanent disturbance area, the entire Critical Root Zone 
 
[5.0700]-16 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
of the tree shall be included for the purposes of calculating the maximum permanent disturbance area. 
Mitigation shall be in accordance with Section 5.0711(C). Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the City of 
Gresham Invasive Plant List are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
5. A stormwater facility serving only a single residential lot is allowed to be located outside of the 
disturbance area (temporary and permanent) but within the RA provided it is outside the HVRA, there 
is no disturbance to existing tree canopy, and it is located outside the Critical Root Zone of existing 
trees over 6 inches DBH. 
B. Standards for Linear Utility Facilities. In addition to the general standards in Section 5.0709(A), the 
following standards apply to new linear utility facilities (including private connections to existing or new 
utility lines, and new utilities or upgrades of existing utility lines) that are proposed as a standalone 
project. Linear utilities being proposed in conjunction with other development shall be subject to the NRO 
standards applicable to that development rather than this section. Applicants who cannot or choose not to 
comply with the standards of this section may apply for Alternative Review in accordance with Section 
5.0712. 
1. The maximum disturbance area in the RA shall be 1,200 square feet and the maximum width of the 
disturbance area shall not exceed 12 feet at any point. 
2. The disturbance area shall be fully restored with the exception of permanent access points along the 
utility facility. Access points shall not exceed 144 square feet in size, shall be spaced no closer than one 
every 200 feet of utility line, and shall not be located in an HVRA. 
3. Linear utilities shall not run parallel to a stream within an RA for a continuous distance of longer than 
600 feet. 
4. Underground linear utilities that extend more than 50 feet into an RA or which cross a stream shall be 
installed using bore, rather than trench, installation methods. 
5. Trees under 24 inches DBH may be removed within the disturbance area. No trees 24-inch DBH or 
larger shall be removed. If any part of the Critical Root Zone of a 24-inch DBH or larger tree is within a 
proposed disturbance area, the entire tree shall be included for the purposes of calculating the 
maximum disturbance area. Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List 
are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
6. For utility projects undertaken by utilities across property that is not owned by the utility, the utility 
shall not be required to map or provide any information about the property except for the area within 
50 feet on either side of the proposed disturbance area of the utility’s project. 
C. Standards for Non-Linear Utility Facilities other than Public Stormwater Facilities. These standards apply to 
non-linear minor basic utilities such as diversion structures, lift stations, pump stations, wellheads, and 
small water treatment facilities that serve more than one lot or development. In addition to the general 
standards in Section 5.0709(A), the following standards apply to new facilities and upgrades of existing 
facilities that are proposed as a standalone project. Non-linear utilities being proposed in conjunction with 
other development (e.g., a land division) shall be subject to the NRO standards applicable to that 
development rather than this section. Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards 
of this section may apply using the Alternative Standards in Section 5.0712. 
1. The maximum permanent disturbance area in the RA shall be 1,000 square feet. An additional 200 
square feet of temporary disturbance area in the RA is permitted.  
 
[5.0700]-17 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
2. Disturbance areas shall not be allowed in the HVRA. 
3. Trees under 24 inches DBH may be removed within the disturbance area. No trees 24-inch DBH or 
larger shall be removed. If any part of the Critical Root Zone of a 24-inch DBH or larger tree is within a 
proposed disturbance area, the entire tree shall be included for the purposes of calculating the 
maximum disturbance area. Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List 
are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
4. All trees required for mitigation shall be planted on site and outside of proposed utility access 
easements. 
D. Public Stormwater Facilities. These standards apply to publicly owned and maintained stormwater facilities 
designed to manage water quality and/or water quantity and serve more than one lot or development. 
The general standards in Section 5.0709(A) and 5.0711 apply, except as noted herein. These standards 
apply to new facilities and upgrades of existing facilities that are proposed as a standalone project or in 
conjunction with other development (e.g., a land division). Where applied in conjunction with other 
development, all applicable standards of both sections will apply, except that allowances for disturbance 
area and tree removal (including Section 5.0710(H)(4), 5.0710(I)(1) and 5.0710(I)(3)) shall not be 
combined with the allowances of this section.  
Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards of this section may choose to follow 
Section 5.0710(H) or 5.0710(I) if applicable, without using the additional allowances of this section, or may 
apply using the Alternative Standards in Section 5.0712. 
1. Disturbance areas shall not be allowed in the HVRA and must be at least 50 feet from the outer 
boundary of the HVRA.  
2. The maximum disturbance area is limited to the footprint of the proposed stormwater facility, an 
access route for maintenance, and necessary temporary disturbance to construct the facility such as 
grading and construction access. Where the provisions of this section are applied, no additional 
disturbance to the Resource Area is allowed, including allowances for disturbance otherwise permitted 
under Section 5.0710(H)(4) and 5.0710(I)(1). 
3. A maximum of six trees under 6 inches DBH may be removed within the disturbance area. No trees 6-
inch DBH or larger shall be removed within the Resource Area. Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the 
City of Gresham Invasive Plan List are exempt from this standard and may be removed.  
4. Stormwater facilities must be vegetated according to the Gresham Stormwater Management Manual.  
5. All permanent disturbance shall be mitigated following the standards of Section 5.0711. 
6. No walls are allowed in conjunction with stormwater facilities within the Resource Area.  
7. Where this provision is used in conjunction with a land division application, the requirements of 
Section 5.0710(H)(5) or 5.0710(H)(6), as applicable, may be satisfied by putting 100 percent of the 
Resource Area cumulatively within either a tract as described by that section or a public stormwater 
tract.  
E. Standards for Right-of-Ways and Public Access Easements. In addition to the general standards in Section 
5.0709(A), the following standards apply to public rights-of-way (ROW) and Public Access Easements, 
including roads and bridges (stream crossings). ROW and public access easements being proposed in 
conjunction with other development (e.g., a land division) shall be subject to the standards of this section 
in addition to the NRO standards applicable to that development. Applicants who cannot or choose not to 
comply with the standards of this section may apply for Alternative Review in accordance with Section 
 
[5.0700]-18 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
5.0712. 
1. For proposed improvements with ROWs and public access easements that include a stream crossing: 
a. New stream crossings for motorized vehicles subject to this section are allowed only for street 
classifications of collector or above shown on the Transportation System Plan, all other proposed 
vehicle crossings require alternative review. 
b. New stream crossings for bicycle and pedestrian traffic required by the Transportation System 
Plan, Active Transportation Plan, and/or Appendix J of the Parks and Open Space Master Plan are 
subject to this section, all other proposed pedestrian crossings require alternative review. 
c. Within the RA, standard ROW cross section width dedication shall be required, although the width 
of the street section improvements shall be reduced by eliminating medians, planter strips, and 
parking lanes. 
d. Stream crossings shall be designed by an Engineer. Stream crossings where no regulated floodplain 
has been identified will be designed to pass a 100-year flood without any increase in the upstream 
flood height elevation. 
2. Trees under 24 inches DBH may be removed in the RA if the Critical Root Zone is within 10 feet of the 
proposed improvements. No trees 24-inch DBH or larger shall be removed, except within the approved 
permanent disturbance area established pursuant to Subsection (G), below. Dangerous Trees or trees 
listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
3. Reduction of cross section for rights of way that lie entirely within the RA or HVRA may be allowed by 
removing median, parking lane, planter strip, or combination thereof. Alleys may be utilized, including: 
a. Dead-end alleys not exceeding a length of 150 feet that may be designed for two-way operation. 
b. Alleys entirely within RA or HVRA are exempt from the alley design restriction of Appendix 
5.501(G)(5). 
F. Standards for Public Trails and Paths and Park Enhancements. In addition to the general standards in 
Section 5.0709(A), the following standards apply to public trails, paths and related park enhancements, 
except for bridges/stream crossings allowed in accordance with Section 5.0710(E). Applicants who cannot 
or choose not to comply with the standards of this section may apply for Alternative Review in accordance 
with Section 5.0712. 
1. The maximum disturbance area within the RA shall be 500 square feet per acre of RA within the site. 
2. All trails shall be outside the HVRA except as designated in Appendix J of the 2009 Gresham Parks and 
Recreation, Trails and Natural Areas Master Plan (or its successor). 
3. New trails or paths shall not result in disturbance of the Critical Root Zone of any tree 6-inch DBH or 
greater in size whose trunk is located inside the HVRA. 
4. Trees under 24 inches DBH may be removed within the disturbance area. No trees 24-inch DBH or 
larger shall be removed. If any part of the Critical Root Zone of a 24-inch DBH or larger tree is within a 
proposed disturbance area, the entire tree shall be included for the purposes of calculating the 
maximum disturbance area. Dangerous Trees or trees listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List 
are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
5. All trees required for mitigation shall be planted outside of those areas that will be maintained to 
provide trail access. 
 
[5.0700]-19 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
6. The proposed trail, path, or enhancement shall be associated with previously developed park 
infrastructure, be connected to the existing park systems, implement master planned park facilities, or 
be identified in Appendix J of the 2009 Gresham Parks and Recreation, Trails and Natural Areas Master 
Plan (or its successor). 
G. Standards for Municipal Utility Facilities. In addition to the general standards in Section 5.0709(A), the 
following standards apply to municipal utility facilities associated solely with Capital Improvement Projects. 
For the purposes of this section, municipal utility facilities include: municipal potable water, municipal 
stormwater and municipal wastewater utility facilities including but not limited to water treatment plants, 
wastewater treatment plants, raw water intakes, pump stations, transmission mains, conduits or service 
lines, reservoirs, and outfall devices. These facilities may be built, expanded, repaired, maintained, 
reconfigured, rehabilitated, replaced or upsized within an RA provided that the standards are met. 
Applicants shall comply with the application requirements in Section 5.0712(A), except the only one 
alternative (the preferred alternative) must be evaluated. The application shall demonstrate that the 
following standards are met. 
1. The project does not encroach closer to an HVRA than practicable; and 
2. Best management practices will be employed that accomplish the following: 
a. Account for watershed assessment information in project design. 
b. Minimize trenching and tree removal within the RA through methods such as boring. 
c. Obtain necessary local or state erosion control permit. Utilize and maintain erosion controls until 
site stabilization measures are established. 
d. Replant immediately after backfilling or as soon as weather conditions allow. 
e. Retain topsoil (stockpiled outside of RA if feasible) and use for final cover. 
f. Minimize the duration of the work within the RA. 
g. Complete in-water construction during appropriate seasons, or as approved within requisite 
Federal or State permits. 
H. Standards for Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. Applicants who cannot or choose not to 
comply with the standards of this section may apply for Alternative Review in accordance with Section 
5.0712. 
1. Land divisions for uses other than single detached dwelling or middle housing development. 
a. Applicants who are dividing, but not further developing, shall comply with the standards in 
Subsections (5) – (6) and shall: 
i. Complete the mitigation requirements in accordance with Section 5.0711 and thereby exempt 
all subsequent development on lots or parcels containing RA from further review under this 
overlay.
0F1 The City will verify that the mitigation requirements have been met when individual 
lot building permit applications are processed; or 
ii. Not complete the mitigation requirements, thus requiring that all subsequent development 
 
1 This does not exempt any development from protecting resources present at the time of any future development 
application. All future development must ensure compliance with state and federal resource protection rules related to 
jurisdictional water resources. 
 
[5.0700]-20 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
within an RA be subject to further land use review for compliance with this overlay. 
b. Applicants who are dividing and further developing shall comply with the standards in Subsections 
(5) – (7), the general standards in Section 5.0709(A), and all of the requirements of the NRO 
applicable to the development. Building permits may be issued once one or both of the following 
has occurred: 
i. When the City will be implementing the mitigation requirements, the Applicant has 
transferred to the City all mitigation and maintenance funding required by the Conditions of 
Approval; and/or 
ii. When the Applicant is responsible for implementing the mitigation requirements, the 
mitigation plan has been approved and a Guarantee of Completion equal to 110 percent of the 
estimated cost of mitigation implementation and maintenance is filed with the City. The 
Guarantee of Completion shall ensure site preparation and initial planting within one year of 
final plat approval. 
2. Land divisions for single detached dwelling or middle housing development. Applicants shall comply 
with the standards in Subsections (3) – (8), the general standards in Section 5.0709(A), and all other 
requirements of the NRO applicable to the development. Building permits may be issued once one or 
both of the following has occurred: 
a. When the City will be implementing the mitigation requirements, the Applicant has transferred to 
the City all mitigation and maintenance funding required by the Conditions of Approval; and/or 
b. When the Applicant is responsible for implementing the mitigation requirements, the mitigation 
plan has been approved and a Guarantee of Completion equal to 110 percent of the estimated 
cost of mitigation implementation and maintenance is filed with the City. The Guarantee of 
Completion shall ensure site preparation and initial planting within one year of final plat approval. 
 
3. Each lot or parcel created for single detached dwelling or middle housing development shall have a 
developable area of no less than 2,000 square feet with a building envelope whose minimum width or 
depth is at least 16 feet. The developable area on each lot shall be drawn, dimensioned, and noted on 
the subdivision plat to demonstrate compliance with this standard. 
4. The maximum amount of RA that may be disturbed within the subdivision or partition shall not exceed 
10 percent of the total RA on the parent parcel. Trees and vegetation may be removed within the 
disturbance area provided mitigation is provided in accordance with Section 5.0711. If any part of the 
Critical Root Zone of a 24-inch DBH or larger tree is within a proposed disturbance area, the entire tree 
shall be included for the purposes of calculating the maximum disturbance area. 
5. Except as allowed pursuant to Subsection (6) below, when a property containing any RA is divided, 
plats shall delineate and show the RA as a separate unbuildable tract according to the following 
process: 
a. The applicant must place at least 90 percent of the RA in a separate tract. In addition, where 
mitigation is proposed at the time of land division, any RA that is proposed to be preserved, and 
therefore is not mitigated, shall also be placed in a separate tract. The separate tract(s), which 
shall not be a part of any lot used for construction of a dwelling unit or any other development, 
shall be shown on the preliminary plat. 
 
[5.0700]-21 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
b. Prior to final plat approval, ownership of the RA tract shall be identified to distinguish it from lots 
intended for sale. The tract may be identified as any one of the following: 
i. Private natural area held by the owner or homeowners’ association by a restrictive covenant 
conveying storm and surface water management rights to the City; or 
ii. For residential subdivisions, private natural area subject to Natural Resource and Watershed 
Easement established in accordance with Section 9.0303; or 
iii. At the owner’s option and if accepted by the City, public natural area where the tract has been 
dedicated to the City or Metro along with conveying stormwater and surface water 
management rights to the City; 
c. Any of the above documents in Subsection (b) shall be submitted to the City for review and after it 
is approved as part of the final plat review process, be recorded with Multnomah County along 
with the subdivision plat 
6. If the parent parcel is less than 22,000 square feet, a separate tract is not required. However, the 
Applicant shall place at least 70 percent of the RA in a Natural Resource and Watershed Easement 
established in accordance with Section 9.0303. 
7. The amount of impervious area shall be minimized within an RA as follows: 
a. When driveways for multiple properties are proposed inside an RA, the driveways shall be shared 
by at least two properties. 
b. No access shall be granted through an RA if access can be achieved outside the RA. 
8. Within the Pleasant Valley and Springwater subareas (shown on Map 5.0714-1), the rear property line 
of a single detached dwelling or middle housing lot shall not abut an RA. The City may allow exceptions 
to this standard due to topography, existing development, street layout, or other reasons that make 
this requirement impractical. Land divisions which do not include new streets or roads are exempt 
from this requirement. 
9. Property Line Adjustments. The following standards apply to Type I Property Line Adjustments (PLAs). 
The site of a Property Line Adjustment is the two properties affected by the relocation of the common 
property line. The standards in Subsections (a) and (b), below, shall be met. 
a. A Property Line Adjustment shall not result in any property being entirely in the RA, unless that 
property is entirely in the RA before the PLA, or the property will be dedicated or limited by deed 
restriction to open space use. 
b. The amount of developable area on each property that is outside of the RA may not be reduced 
below 2,000 square feet with a building envelope whose minimum dimension is at least 16-feet. 
The Property Line Adjustment shall not cause a property that contains less than this amount of 
developable area to move further out of conformance. 
I. Other Development Activities subject to Maximum Disturbance Area Standard. In addition to the general 
standards in Section 5.0709(A), the following maximum disturbance area standards apply to all regulated 
development activities except for those uses and activities regulated by Subsections (C) through (F) or 
Subsection (H) above. Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards of this section 
may apply for Alternative Review in accordance with Section 5.0712. 
1. The maximum permanent disturbance area allowed is 25 percent of the RA on the site. In addition, a 
temporary disturbance area is allowed within 10 feet of the proposed improvements up to a maximum 
 
[5.0700]-22 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
of 5 percent of the RA on the site. 
2. The disturbance area (temporary and permanent) shall be entirely outside the HVRA. 
3. Trees may be removed within the permanent disturbance area. Within the temporary disturbance 
area, no trees 24-inches DBH or larger shall be removed. If any part of the Critical Root Zone of a 24-
inch DBH or larger tree is within a proposed disturbance area, the entire tree shall be included for the 
purposes of calculating the maximum permanent disturbance area. Dangerous Trees or trees listed on 
the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List are exempt from this standard and may be removed. 
4. Non-residential applications that are otherwise subject to a discretionary review process shall provide 
findings demonstrating that the proposal minimizes the number of trees 24-inch DBH or larger 
proposed for removal. 
5.0711  MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS   
In order to achieve the goal of reestablishing the ecological values and functions provided by the Resource 
Area, tree replacement and vegetation planting are required when development extends into an RA. The City 
of Gresham mitigation requirements can be met by demonstrating compliance with the standards of this 
section. Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards of this section may apply for 
Alternative Review in accordance with Section 5.0712. 
A. Exemptions. Removal of trees listed on the City of Gresham Invasive Plant List or Dangerous trees are 
exempt from the mitigation standards of this section. Dangerous Trees shall be replaced at a ratio of one 
tree planted on site for each tree removed. 
B. Jurisdictional Wetlands. Wetland mitigation shall be conducted per the functional and area replacement 
standards established by the Army Corps of Engineers and the Oregon Department of State Lands. The 
NRO shall not impose additional mitigation requirements for wetlands that exceed the mitigation ratios or 
functions required by federal and state law. Impacts to protected water features shall be mitigated within 
the sub-watershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code) where the property is located, and all mitigation shall 
be done using native plants. Impacts to any RA that are not within the boundaries of the jurisdictional 
wetland shall be mitigated pursuant to Subsections C or D, as applicable. 
C. Mitigation Standards for Single Detached Dwellings or Middle Housing on existing legal lots of record. 
Mitigation for single detached dwellings, middle housing, and related accessory structures and accessory 
dwellings on existing legal lots of record shall be conducted off-site by the City of Gresham. Applicants are 
required to pay for off-site mitigation -in-lieu of providing onsite mitigation otherwise required by the 
NRO. The payment shall be based on a rate set by Council resolution. Payment is not required in the 
following situations: 
1. Mitigation has been or will be completed for a jurisdictional wetland in accordance with Subsection (B) 
and no other mitigation is required. 
2. Mitigation was completed in conjunction with the land division that created the lot in accordance with 
Section 5.0710(H). 
D. Mitigation Standards for All Other Uses and Activities. 
1. Mitigation shall occur at a 2:1 ratio of mitigation area to proposed disturbance area. The target plant 
density within mitigation areas is specified below. 
 
 
[5.0700]-23 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
PLANT TYPE TARGET PLANT DENSITY WITHIN MITIGATION AREA 
Trees 436 Trees per Acre 
Shrubs 2,178 Shrubs per Acre 
Ground Cover 90% Coverage Within 3 Years, 100% Cover Within 5 Years 
 
The total number of trees and shrubs required within a mitigation shall be calculated as follows: 
 
PLANT TYPE FORMULA FOR CALCULATING REQUIRED MITIGATION PLANTING 
Total Number of Trees Mitigation Area (sf) x 0.01 (trees/sf) 
Total Number of Shrubs Mitigation Area (sf) x 0.05 (shrubs/sf) 
Ground Cover Seed or Install Native Ground Cover Plants (Grasses or Forbs) to Achieve 
Target Plant Density 
NOTE: The number of trees to be planted may be reduced based on the existing canopy coverage of trees within the 
mitigation area (Adjusted total number of trees = (Mitigation Area (sf) – Existing Canopy Coverage (sf)) x 0.01 trees/sf)). 
Canopy coverage must be determined by an arborist. 
The number of shrubs to be planted may be reduced based on the total area of continuous shrub coverage within the 
mitigation area (Adjusted total number of shrubs = (Mitigation Area (sf) – Continuous Shrub Coverage (sf)) x 0.05 
shrubs/sf)). Continuous shrub coverage must be identified by a qualified natural resource specialist and surveyed by a 
professional land surveyor, with dominant species identified.  
 
2. All vegetation shall be planted on the Applicant’s site within the RA or in an area contiguous to the RA; 
provided, however, that if the vegetation is planted outside the RA, then the Applicant shall preserve 
the contiguous area by executing a deed restriction, such as a restrictive covenant. Location of 
mitigation areas shall be prioritized as specified below. 
PRIORITY LOCATION 
Riparian Priority 1 Within the HVRA, outside the Fire Defensible Spaces Zones 1 and 2 
Riparian Priority 2 Within the RA, outside of Fire Defensible Spaces Zones 1 and 2 
Riparian Priority 3 Within the HVRA or RA, within Fire Defensible Spaces Zone 2 
NOTE:  
Fire Defensible Spaces Zone 1 – Within 10 feet of a habitable structure 
Fire Defensible Spaces Zone 2 – Within 30 feet of a habitable structure 
No mitigation credit will be given for plantings proposed within a Fire Defensible Spaces Zone 1 (within 10 feet of a 
habitable structure) 
 
3. All mitigation plantings shall be native species appropriate for site soil types, hydrologic conditions, 
aspect and existing vegetation coverage, topography, geologic hazard status, and fire safety. 
a. Plantings shall consist of no more than 1 in 10 mitigation trees and no more than 1 in 10 mitigation 
shrubs designated as belonging to one of the following groups. Numeric limitations apply per 
group, rather than across all groups. 
i. ‘Suspected Climate Stressed’ on the Gresham Native Plant List. 
 
[5.0700]-24 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
ii. ‘Very High Forest Pest Risk’ on the Gresham Native Plant List 
b. If 20 or more mitigation trees are planted, no more than 1/3 shall be of the same species. 
c. If fewer than 100 shrubs are planted at least three shrub species are required to be used. For more 
than 100 shrubs at least six shrub species are required to be used. 
4. All plants that are on the Gresham Invasive Plant List must be removed from the mitigation area prior 
to mitigation plant installation. Invasive control methods prior to planting and after planting shall be 
noted in the mitigation plan. 
5. A mitigation maintenance plan shall be included and shall be sufficient to ensure the success of the 
planting. Compliance with the plan shall be a condition of development approval. 
6. The Applicant is responsible for monitoring the mitigation site for five years and submitting an annual 
monitoring report to the City during that monitoring period demonstrating that the following 
minimum success thresholds for mitigation plant survival and invasive species eradication on the site 
are being met. If survival of trees or shrubs drops below 80 percent of the initial required planting 
quantities within the first five years, replacement plants must be added to maintain 80 percent or 
greater survival of plantings. Prior to re-planting, the cause of plant mortality must be determined and 
documented with a description of how the problem will be corrected. 
 
PLANT TYPE SUCCESS THRESHOLDS 
Mitigation Trees 350 Trees per Acre (0.008 Trees per Square Foot) 
Mitigation Shrubs 1,750 Shrubs per Acre (0.04 Shrubs per Square Foot) 
Mitigation Ground Cover 90% Cover After 3 Years; 100% Cover After 5 Years 
Invasive Plants Invasive Plant Coverage May Not Exceed 20% or 25 Square Feet of 
Contiguous Area Within the Mitigation Area 
 
a. Plant survival shall be demonstrated as follows: 
i. For mitigation sites that are less than or equal to 0.25 acres in size: 
• Complete census of installed tree and shrub plantings 
• Visual estimate to provide cover and species diversity of herbaceous plants. 
• Visual estimate of invasive plant coverage 
ii. For mitigation sites that are greater than 0.25 acres in size: 
• Vegetation sampling to provide annual estimates of cover, species diversity, and density of 
woody vegetation. Depending on the Mitigation Plan, sampling may need to be conducted 
within distinct planting zones (i.e., within Fire Defensible Spaces, within riparian forest, 
within utility corridor, etc.). Annual monitoring shall include the following: 
○ Use of permanent plots and visual estimates to sample tree, shrub, herbaceous, and 
invasive species coverage. 
○ Sampling shall be conducted during the same stage of the growing season each year, 
which shall be a period when plants are easily identifiable. 
○ A minimum of five sample plots for mitigation areas two acres or less. An additional 
two sample plots for each acre of mitigation area thereafter. 
 
[5.0700]-25 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
○ Sample plots should cover at least 700 square feet. 
• Additional vegetation monitoring details can be found in DSL’s Routine Monitoring 
Guidance for Vegetation. 
b. At a minimum, the annual monitoring report must contain the following: 
• Photos from fixed locations 
• Sampling data sheets 
• Summarized sampling results 
• Monitoring plan showing the location of sample plots and photo points. 
7. Financial guarantee, in the form of an instrument approved by the City, shall be submitted to the City 
before building permits are issued, or when no building permit is required before development within 
the RA commences. It shall be in an amount adequate to cover 110 percent of the cost of performing 
the mitigation. The City will release the guarantee at the end of the five-year monitoring period, or 
before, if it determines that the trees and shrubs have been successfully established. 
8. No Certificate of Occupancy will be issued until mitigation has been installed. 
E. Requests to provide Payment-in-Lieu of Mitigation. An Applicant may request approval to provide 
payment-in-lieu of mitigation for all or a portion of the required mitigation. The payment-in-lieu amount is 
set by Council resolution and shall be used for natural resource projects within the city at large. 
1. Type II review of a request to provide payment-in-lieu of mitigation is required for projects involving 
Design Review (Types B, C, D, and E only), land division, or vegetation removal or disturbance areas 
within the RA in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
a. Application requirements. In addition to the application requirements in Section 5.0707, 
applicants shall submit an Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis prepared in accordance 
with Section 5.0712(A)(1). 
b. Approval criteria. The Applicant has demonstrated that it is not practicable to complete all or a 
portion of the mitigation on-site due to insufficient land area suitable for mitigation. Land area 
may be considered unsuitable for mitigation if it is developed or contaminated or has similar 
constraints, or if it has existing high quality resources that would not benefit from mitigation. 
2. For projects which do not meet the thresholds in Subsection (1), applicants may request that the City 
accept payment-in-lieu of mitigation through a Type I review provided there are no impacts to the 
HVRA. 
3. If the Applicant chooses, the Applicant may offer to convey land to the City, for natural resource 
purposes, to meet some or all of the payment-in-lieu. Determination of the land’s ecological value and 
whether or not to accept the offer of conveyance is at the city’s sole discretion. 
PROCESS  
5.07 12 ALTERNATIVE REVIEW    
Applicants who cannot or choose not to comply with the standards of Section 5.0709, 5.0710, or 5.0711, may 
apply for Alternative Review in accordance with this Section. 
 
[5.0700]-26 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
A. Application Requirements. In addition to the items described in Section 5.07087 the Applicant shall also 
provide information described in Subsections (1) through (3) and any additional information needed to 
demonstrate compliance with the approval criteria in Subsection B. For utility projects undertaken by 
public utilities across property that is not owned by the utility, the utility is not required to map or provide 
any information about the property except for the area within 100 feet of the location of the proposed 
disturbance area of the utility’s project. 
1. Alternatives Analysis and Impact Evaluation. An alternatives analysis and impact evaluation are 
required to determine compliance with the approval criteria and to evaluate development alternatives 
for a particular property. 
The alternatives analysis and impact evaluation shall include all the following items: 
a. Identification and assessment of the ecological functions provided by the Resource Areas on the 
project site, and if it is reasonably certain that there will be off-site impacts, the functions of the 
RA and HVRA within the same sub-watershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code), including: 
• Hydrologic Function (water storage and delay) 
• Water Quality Function (sediment stabilization and retention, phosphorous retention, nitrate 
removal and retention) 
• Aquatic Habitat Support Function (for anadromous and/or resident species) 
• Terrestrial Habitat (for invertebrates, native plant diversity, pollinators, birds, reptiles, 
amphibians, and mammals) 
• Stream Temperature Moderation 
b. Evaluation of alternative locations, design modifications, or alternative methods of development 
to determine which option best reduces the impacts. At a minimum, the analysis should evaluate 
three alternatives: 1) no project, 2) the preferred alternative, and 3) a second practicable 
alternative that proposes less development within RAs. 
The alternatives shall be evaluated on the basis of their unavoidable impacts on the RA, the 
ecological functions provided by the RA on the property and off-site impacts within the sub-
watershed (6th Field Hydrologic Unit Code). The applicant must provide adequate detail for the 
evaluated alternatives so that the distinct locations, designs, and construction methods and their 
unavoidable impacts can be compared. The applicant must clearly demonstrate that the preferred 
alternative’s location, design, and construction methods represents the alternative with the least 
unavoidable impact overall to the ecological functions provided by the project site. 
c. For the selected alternative, an explanation of unavoidable impacts must be provided. The full 
range of impacts must be detailed, including the precise impact areas (both temporary and 
permanent) as well as impacts to ecological functions provided at the site and, if applicable, within 
the same sub-watershed. 
d. With the exception of the standard(s) subject to the alternative review, the applicant shall 
document that all other applicable NRO standards are met. 
2. Mitigation Plan for Alternative Review. The purpose of a mitigation plan is to compensate for 
unavoidable impacts that result from the chosen development alternative as identified in the impact 
evaluation. 
a. An Applicant may choose to develop a mitigation plan consistent with the requirements of Section 
 
[5.0700]-27 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
5.0711. If an Applicant so chooses, then the Applicant shall submit a mitigation plan demonstrating 
such compliance. 
b. If an Applicant chooses to develop a mitigation plan that would not comply with the requirements 
of Section 5.0711, then the Applicant shall submit a mitigation plan that includes all the following: 
i. An explanation of how the proposed mitigation will adequately compensate for unavoidable 
impacts described in the impact evaluation required by Subsection 5.0712(A)(1). The Applicant 
may use the mitigation that would be required under Section 5.0711 as the baseline mitigation 
required to compensate for unavoidable impacts to an RA that provides an average level of 
ecological functions. 
ii. Documentation of permits from Army Corps, DSL, MCDD and DEQ (if applicable). 
iii. A list of all parties responsible for implementing and monitoring the mitigation plan and, if 
mitigation will occur off-site, the names of the owners of property where mitigation plantings 
will occur and documentation of a deed restriction. 
iv. The Applicant’s mitigation site monitoring, success criteria, and reporting plan. 
v. A complete list of proposed mitigation plantings. 
vi. If offsite mitigation is proposed, a narrative description of why mitigation cannot be completed 
on site. The following could be considered: 
• Inadequate RA available 
• Remaining RA already includes a documented mitigation area 
• Remaining RA already provides a high level of functions 
 
 
 
vii. If mitigation is proposed which is not within the same sub-watershed (6th Field Hydrologic 
Unit Code) as the proposed impact, documentation that provides evidence that there are no 
properties within the sub-watershed that are available for purchase and/or could provide the 
opportunity to off-set the project’s unavoidable impacts. This could include documentation of 
the following: 
• Communication records with property owners that potential mitigation areas are not 
available 
• Records of a documented mitigation area for properties that would otherwise be 
appropriate for RA mitigation 
• Documentation or analysis results that indicate there are inadequate mitigation 
opportunities on properties within the sub-watershed 
viii. For a proposal that includes mitigation on a site within the same 5th Field Hydrologic Unit 
Code, the applicant’s mitigation plan should include a narrative description of how the 
proposal will adequately offset unavoidable impacts of the project to the functions of the RA. 
ix. Mitigation shall not be allowed on sites that are outside of the same 5th Field Hydrologic Unit 
Code excepting that wetland mitigation of 0.2 acres and less can be mitigated through state-
approved PIL or bank opportunities if the applicant can demonstrate no feasible options exist 
 
[5.0700]-28 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
for mitigation within the 5th field HUC. 
3. The Impact Evaluation and Alternatives Analysis shall be prepared and signed by a knowledgeable and 
qualified natural resource professional, such as a wildlife biologist, wetland scientist, botanist, or other 
appropriate and knowledgeable discipline. The application shall include a description of the 
qualifications and experience of all persons that contributed to the Alternatives Analysis and Impact 
Evaluation and to the Mitigation Plan, and, for each person that contributed, a description of the 
elements of such reports to which the person contributed. 
B. Approved Criteria. 
1. Avoid intrusion. An Applicant shall first avoid the intrusion of development into the HVRA and RA to 
the extent practicable. The development that is proposed shall have less overall unavoidable impact to 
the HVRA or RA or ecological functions of the HVRA or RAs than other practicable alternative(s), 
including a different practicable alternative(s) that proposes less development within RAs. If there is 
HVRA on a property then the Applicant shall first avoid the intrusion of development into the HVRA, to 
the extent practicable. Specifically, the alternatives analysis must demonstrate that there are no 
practicable alternatives for the proposed use or activity to be located outside the RA or to be located 
inside the RA and to be designed and constructed in a way that will meet all of the applicable NRO 
development standards. Where the RA will be avoided, the construction management plan must 
designate the RA to be left undisturbed and demonstrate that there will be no impacts to the RA or the 
functions of the RA in the designated area(s). To avoid development in Ras and HVRAs, to the extent 
practicable, Applications should consider the best management practices outlined in the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
 
 
 
2. Minimize impacts. If the Applicant demonstrates that there is no practicable alternative that will avoid 
disturbance of the RA or HVRA, then the development proposed by the Applicant within the RA or 
HVRA shall minimize unavoidable impacts to the extent practicable. If there is HVRA on a property, 
then the development within HVRA shall be considered more detrimental than development within 
other parts of the RA. 
a. The applicant’s Alternatives Analysis and Impact Evaluation must demonstrate that the proposed 
development will minimize unavoidable impacts to ecological functions and loss of habitat 
consistent with uses allowed by right under the base zone, to the extent practicable. 
b. To the extent practicable within the RA, the proposed development shall be designed, located, and 
constructed to minimize grading, removal of native vegetation, disturbance and removal of native 
soils, adverse hydrological impacts on water resources , and impacts on wildlife corridors and fish 
passage through the use of the best management practices and habitat-friendly development 
practices. Examples of these are outlined in the City of Gresham Environmental Technical 
Guidance Manual. 
3. Mitigate impacts. If the Applicant demonstrates that there is no practicable alternative that will avoid 
disturbance of the RA, then development shall mitigate for unavoidable impacts. The mitigation plan 
must demonstrate how the functions listed in Section 5.0713A(1)a are maintained or enhanced. All 
 
[5.0700]-29 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
proposed mitigation plans shall meet the following standards: 
a. The mitigation plan shall demonstrate that it compensates for unavoidable impacts after taking 
into consideration the Applicant’s efforts to minimize such impacts through the use of the best 
management practices outlined in the City of Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual 
and through any additional or innovative techniques. 
b. Mitigation shall occur on the site of the disturbance, to the extent practicable. If onsite mitigation 
is not practicable, the location of the proposed offsite mitigation must comply with 
5.0712(A)(2)(vii)-(A)(2)(x). 
c. All re-vegetation plantings shall be with native plants. listed in the City of Gresham Environmental 
Technical Guidance Manual. 
d. All in-stream work in fish-bearing streams shall be done in accordance with the Oregon 
Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) in-stream work timing schedule or approved in-water 
work timing variance (approved by National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 
e. A mitigation maintenance plan shall be included and shall be sufficient to ensure the success of the 
planting. Compliance with the plan shall be a condition of development approval. 
f. Financial guarantee, in the form of an instrument approved by the City, shall be submitted to the 
City before building permits are issued, or when no building permit is required before 
development within the RA commences. It shall be in an amount adequate to cover 110 percent of 
the cost of performing the mitigation. The City will release the guarantee at the end of the five-
year monitoring period, or before, if it determines that the trees and shrubs have been 
successfully established. 
 
 
 
g. A mitigation plan that entails the amount of planting that would be required under Section 5.0711 
based on the amount of proposed disturbance area within the RA, and that otherwise complies 
with all of the mitigation requirements in Section 5.0711, shall be considered to have satisfied this 
approval criterion. 
5.0713  MODIFICATIONS OF NRO STANDARDS   
Where the compliance with the NRO would cause unreasonable hardship, applicants may seek a Type II Minor 
Variance or a Type III Major Variance pursuant to Section 10.1500. 
5.0714  MAPPING PROTOCOLS   
Mapped Resource Area (RA), High Value Resource Area (HVRA), and Potential Resource Area (PRA) boundaries 
are based on a GIS-supported application of the following mapping protocols. RAs and HVRAs include water 
features and buffers and upland habitat. All areas within the boundaries of the water features itself are 
designated as HVRA. Areas within the boundaries of the buffer are designated as either RA or HVRA. All buffer 
measurements are based on horizontal distance rather than a slope distance. The buffers recognize the unique 
natural resource opportunities within the new communities of Pleasant Valley, Springwater and Kelley Creek. 
 
[5.0700]-30 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
The boundaries of these subareas are identified on Map 5.0714-1. 
A. Resource Areas (RA) and High Value Resource Areas (HVRA). Resource Areas and High Value Resource 
Areas include areas with the following attributes: 
1. Regulated wetlands and associated RA and HVRA. 
a. Water feature. Regulated wetlands are designated as HVRAs. Regulated wetlands include wetlands 
shown on National Wetland Inventory (NWI) mapping, Local Wetland Inventory (LWI) mapping, 
and protected wetlands identified in DSL concurred site-specific studies as well as other wetlands 
associated with streams and other non-wetland waterways. See also Section 5.0715(B). 
b. Buffer. The RA and HVRA associated with the regulated wetlands includes a buffer measured 50 
feet from the edge of the wetland or from the delineated edge of the wetland, where the edge of 
the wetland is delineated in accordance with methods required by the Department of State Lands 
and the Corps of Engineers. The inner 35 feet of the buffer closest to the edge of the wetland is 
designated as HVRA. 
2. Regulated streams and associated RA and HVRA. 
a. Water feature. Regulated streams are designated as HVRAs. Regulated streams include all streams 
shown on the City’s GIS stream layer. The GIS stream layer was developed by modeling LiDAR 
topography and ground-truthing streams identified in headwater situations. Streams are 
continued through other waters and wetlands where applicable. 
b. Buffer. The RA and HVRA associated with a regulated stream include a buffer on either side 
measured from the centerline of the stream. The width of the RA and HVRA varies depending on 
stream order as described in Table 5.0714-1. For the purposes of this chapter, “stream order” is 
based on the "top down" Strahler system where rivers of the first order are the outermost 
tributaries. If two streams of the same order merge, the resulting stream is given a number that is 
one higher. If two streams with different stream orders merge, the resulting stream is given the 
higher of the two numbers. 
3. Other regulated waters and associated RA and HVRA. 
a. Water feature. Other regulated (non-wetland) waters are designated as HVRAs. These include 
ponds and lakes created in-line with a stream channel. 
b. Buffer. The RA and HVRA associated with other regulated non-wetland waterbodies include a 
buffer measured landward from the b Ordinary High Water Mark of the waterbody. The width of 
the RA and HVRA associated with the waterbody corresponds to the RA and HVRA width 
associated with the stream order of the stream that flows out of the waterbody, as described in 
Table 5.0714-1. 
4. Upland Habitat Areas. 
a. Significant Upland Habitat Areas which were identified as discrete upland habitat of importance in 
either the Pleasant Valley Master Plan or the Springwater Master Plan are designated as RA. 
b. Publicly owned land acquired predominantly for protection of natural resources or open space 
uses are designated as RA. 
Table 5.0714- 1: Resource Area Buffer Width 
 
[5.0700]-31 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
REGULATED WATER FEATURE RESOURCE 
AREAS TYPE 
PLEASANT VALLEY PLAN 
DISTRICT, SPRINGWATER 
PLAN DISTRICT, KELLY 
CREEK HEADWATERS 
ALL OTHER 
LOCATIONS 
WITHIN THE CITY 
OF GRESHAM 
Streams 
 
Streams Orders 1-5 
(Measured from 
Centerline of Stream) 
1 RA 50 feet 50 feet 
HVRA 35 feet 35 feet 
2 RA 200 feet 100 feet 
HVRA 50 feet 50 feet 
3 RA 200 feet 100 feet 
HVRA 50 feet 50 feet 
4 RA 200 feet 100 feet 
HVRA 50 feet 50 feet 
5 RA 200 feet 125 feet 
HVRA 50 feet 50 feet 
Wetlands 
(Measured from Delineated Edge) 
RA 50 feet 50 feet 
HVRA 35 feet 35 feet 
Other Waters 
(Measured from Ordinary high 
Water Mark 
RA 50 feet 50 feet 
HVRA 35 feet 35 feet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Map 5.0714- 1: Natural Resource Overlay Subarea Boundaries  
 
[5.0700]-32 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
 
 
B. Potential Resource Area include the following lands that were not designated as RA, but which have a high 
probability of including significant wetlands: 
1. Those portions of the East Buttes toe of slope (as represented by the breakline contour) that have 
hydric or partially hydric soils and have not been reviewed as part of a Local Wetland Inventory survey 
or are not subject to a wetland determination, submitted to the City for review within the last 5 years. 
These areas are indicated on Figure 5.0714-2. 
2. Lots shown on a Local Wetland Inventory survey as “potential wetland.” 
 
3. General areas identified by Natural Resources staff and City Consultants as potential wetlands based 

 
[5.0700]-33 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
on existing knowledge and remote sensing data. 
Figure 5.0714- 2: East Buttes Potential Resources Area  
 
5.0715  MAP ADMINISTRATION AND CORRECTION    
A. Map Administration. The City shall incorporate all map updates associated with development permit 
corrections to the location of the RA boundary after the land use decision is final. This shall not be 
considered a comprehensive plan map amendment. In the case of purchase of upland acquired by a public 
entity for parks or open space purposes, the map will be updated when change of ownership is provided to  
 
 
the City unless the acquiring agency clearly identifies acquisition was to develop a parcel for active 

 
[5.0700]-34 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
recreational uses. In the case of newly updated information regarding “Potential Wetlands” under 
5.0714.B.3, the map will be updated periodically. 
B. Addition of regulated wetlands. As required by Metro Urban Growth Management Plan Section 3.07.340, 
the City will amend the NRO map to add a wetland when the City or County receives significant evidence 
that the wetland meets any one of the following criteria: 
1. The wetland is fed by surface flows, sheet flows or precipitation, and has evidence of flooding during 
the growing season, and has 60 percent or greater vegetated cover, and is over one-half acre in size; or 
The wetland qualifies as having "intact water quality function" under the 1996 Oregon Freshwater 
Wetland Assessment Methodology; or 
2. The wetland is in the Flood Management Area, and has evidence of flooding during the growing 
season, and is five acres or more in size, and has a restricted outlet or no outlet; or 
The wetland qualifies as having "intact hydrologic control function" under the 1996 Oregon Freshwater 
Wetland Assessment Methodology; or 
3. The wetland or a portion of the wetland is within a horizontal distance of less than one-fourth mile 
from a water body which meets the Department of Environmental Quality definition of "water quality 
limited” water body in OAR Chapter 340, Division 41. 
Examples of significant evidence that a wetland exists that may meet the criteria above are a wetland 
assessment conducted using the 1996 Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology, or 
correspondence from the Department of State Lands that a wetland determination or delineation has 
been submitted or completed for property in the City or County. 
Wetland data must be submitted according to the most recent version of the Oregon Wetland Mapping 
Standard and OAR 141-090-0035 including a minimum required horizontal accuracy of 3 feet. 
C. Map Corrections. All Applicants who believe that the NRO map is inaccurate may file a correction request 
consistent with this subsection. Correction requests will be processed under the Type I development 
permit procedure. The reasons for map corrections and correction criteria are specified in Table 5.0715-1. 
Table 5.0715- 1: Map Correction Criteria  
DISPUTED ISSUE CORRECTION CRITERIA 
Wetland Location Incorrectly 
Identified 
An accurate wetland boundary has been delineated using methods 
currently accepted by the Oregon Department of State Lands and the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers, and concurrence has been received by 
Department of State Lands. Wetland data must be submitted according to 
the most recent version of the Oregon Wetland Mapping Standard and OAR 
141-090-0035 including a minimum required horizontal accuracy of 3 feet. 
Stream Location Incorrectly 
Identified 
An accurate location of the stream centerline based on the midpoint 
between Ordinary High Water Marks has been identified and surveyed as 
specified in the Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
Removal/Fill of streams after January 15, 2021 will not alter established 
stream orders. 
  
Other Regulated Waterbody An accurate location of the feature’s Ordinary High Water Mark as defined 
 
[5.0700]-35 
City of Gresham Development Code  (07/26) 
DISPUTED ISSUE CORRECTION CRITERIA 
Location Incorrectly Identified in Section 5.0714(A)(3) has been identified and surveyed as specified in the 
Gresham Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 
Title 3 Wetland Completed OFWAM forms documenting the change in protected status and 
qualifications of the person(s) completing the forms. 
Public Purpose for Upland RA Documentation clearly showing the property was acquired for development 
with active recreational uses. 
PRA Requirements Satisfied Areas evaluated pursuant to Section 5.0703(B) may be removed from the 
PRA in concert with any associated RA and HVRA updates. Where the 
perimeter of such site evaluations do not coincide with a property line they 
will be internally buffered by 50 feet and only the resulting areas will be 
removed from the PRA. 
5.0716  VIOLATIONS   
Actions that violate the RA regulations, such as removing protected vegetation or impacting protected water 
resources without having a required permit, are subject to the abatement and penalty provisions of Section 
2.0008 of the Gresham Community Development Code. 
A. For correcting violations regarding unauthorized removal of an RA, the property owner shall submit an 
application that meets all applicable standards of the NRO including mitigation for all impacts, including 
tree removal. 
B. If one or more of the applicable standards of the NRO cannot be met, then the property owner shall 
submit a remediation plan for Type II review that demonstrates that there will be: 
1. No permanent loss of any type of resource of functional value; 
2. A significant improvement of at least one functional value; and 
3. There will be minimal loss of resources and functional values during the remediation action until it is 
fully established. 
C. The remediation plan shall be developed by a Professional Wetland Scientist or other knowledgeable and 
qualified natural resource professional, such as a wildlife biologist, wetland, scientist, or botanist. 
D. Best practices to accomplish the requirements of the remediation plan are outlined in the Gresham 
Environmental Technical Guidance Manual. 