Chapter 16.04
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS*
Districts
Official Map
Zoning District Boundaries
Urban Growth Area
* Editor's Note: Some sections may not contain a history.
16.04.010 Districts
16.04.010
For the purposes of this Code, the City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Very Low Density Residential VLDR
Low Density Residential LDR
Medium Density Residential-Low MDRL
Medium Density Residential-High MDRH
High Density Residential HDR
Neighborhood Commercial NC
Office Commercial oc
Office Retail OR
Retail Commercial RC
General Commercial GC
Light Industrial LI
General Industrial GI
Flood Plain Overlay FP
Institutional/Public IP
Old Town Overlay OT
16.04.020 Official Map
Zoning district boundaries are shown on the Official Plan and Zoning Map of the City. This
Map is made part of this Code by reference, and shall be kept on file in the City Recorder's office.
Any future changes to the zoning ofland within the City shall be appropriately depicted on the Plan
and Zoning Map and certified as to the date of amendment. The Official Plan and Zoning Map shall
be the first and final reference point for verifying other land use mapping and in determining actual
zoning district boundaries. A dated reproduction of the Official Plan and Zoning Map is attached as
Appendix A.
267 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.04.030
16.04.030 Zoning District Boundaries
The Commission shall resolve any dispute over the exact location of a zoning district boundary.
In interpreting the location of such boundaries on the Official Plan and Zoning Map, the Commission
shall rely on the following guidelines:
A. Unless otherwise indicated, zoning district boundaries are the centerlines of streets, roads,
highways, alleys, or such lines extended.
B. Where a boundary line follows or nearly coincides with a section, lot or property ownership
line, the boundary shall be construed as following such line.
C. In the event that a dedicated street, road, highway, or alley is vacated by ordinance, the zoning
regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply up to the centerline of such rights-of­
way.
D. If a right-of-way is vacated in total to one (1) property, the zoning of that property shall apply to
the total vacated right-of-way.
16.04.040 Urban Growth Area
The zoning districts shown on the Official Plan and Zoning Map, for land outside of the
incorporated area of the City but within the Urban Growth Boundary, shall serve as a guide to
development in these areas. Actual land use regulation and development shall be controlled under the
terms of the Urban Planning Area Agreement between the City and Washington County. This
Agreement is made part of this Code by reference and is attached as Appendix H. An area
incorporated into the City shall, upon annexation, be given an interim zoning consistent with the
Official Plan and Zoning Map. The City shall provide notice of this interim zoning as per Section
16.72.020. No hearing shall be required and the interim zoning shall be considered final thirty (30)
days after mailing of said notice.
(Sherwood Supp No 6, 4-07) 268

Sections:
