TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES*
16.106.020 Required Improvements
16.106.030 Location
16.106.040 Design
16.106.060 Sidewalks
16.106.070 Bike Lanes
16.106.080 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
16.106.090 Rough Proportionality
16.106.010 Generally
A. Creation
16.106.010
Public streets shall be created in accordance with provisions of this Chapter. Except as
otherwise provided, all street improvements and rights-of-way shall conform to standards for
the City's functional street classification, as shown on the Transportation System Plan (TSP)
Map (Figure 17) and other applicable City standards. The following table depicts the guidelines
for the street characteristics.
Principal 122' 4-6 12' Prohibited 6' 6' 5' 14'
Arterial
(99W)
Arterial 60-102' 2-5 12' Limited 6 feet 6-8' 5' 14' if re-
quired
Collector 58-92' 2-3 11' 8' optional 6' 6-8' 5' 14' median
turn lane
40'Com- 64' 2 20' 8' none 6' 5' none
mercial/
Industrial
Not Ex-
ceedmg
3000 vehi-
cles per
day
50'Com- 64' 2 12' 8' 5' 6' 5' none
mercial/
Industrial
Exceeding
3000 vehi-
cles per
day
Neighbor- 64' 2 18' 8' None 8' 5'with I' none
hood buffer
1,000 ve-
hicles per
day
*Editor's note-Ord. No. 2011-011, § I, adopted October 4, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 16.106,
§§ 16.106.010-16.106.040, and adding a new Ch. 16.106. Former Ch. 16.106 pertained to improvement plan review, and derived
from Ord. 86-851; Ord. 91-922; and Ord. No. 2010-015, adopted October 5, 2010.
449 Supp. No. 18

16.106.010
Local 52' 2 14' 8' on one None 6' 5'with I' none
side only buffer
Alley 16-25' 1-2 10-12' One side if none none none none
20'
Down- 60' 2 11' 7' none 12' pedes- 4' none
town trian zone (included
Street in pedes-
Standard trian
zone)
B. Street Naming
1. All streets created by subdivision or partition will be named prior to submission of the
final plat.
2. Any street created by a public dedication shall be named prior to or upon acceptance of
the deed of dedication.
3. An action to name an unnamed street in the City may be initiated by the Council or by
a person filing a petition as described in this Section.
4. All streets named shall conform to the general requirements as outlined in this Section.
5. At the request of the owner(s), the City may approve a private street name and address.
Private streets are subject to the same street name standards as are public streets. All
private street signs will be provided at the owner(s) expense.
C. Street Name Standards
I. All streets named or renamed shall comply with the following criteria:
a. Major streets and highways shall maintain a common name or number for the
entire alignment.
b. Whenever practicable, names as specified in this Section shall be utilized or re­
tained.
c. Hyphenated or exceptionally long names shall be avoided.
d. Similar names such as Farview and Fairview or Salzman and Saltzman shall be
avoided.
e. Consideration shall be given to the continuation of the name of a street in another
jurisdiction when it is extended into the City.
2. The following classifications (suffixes) shall be utilized in the assignment of all street
names:
a. Boulevards: North/south arterials providing through traffic movement across the
community.
b. Roads: East/west arterials providing through traffic movement across the commu-
nity.
c. Avenues: Continuous, north/south collectors or extensions thereof.
d. Streets: Continuous, east-west collectors or extensions thereof.
e. Drives: Curvilinear collectors (less than 180 degrees) at least 1,000 feet in length or
more.
f. Lanes: Short east/west local streets under 1,000 feet in length.
g. Terraces: short north/south local streets under 1,000 feet in length.
h. Court: All east/west cul-de-sacs.
Supp. No. 18 450

1. Place: All north/south cul-de-sacs.
J. Ways: All looped local streets ( exceeding 180 degrees).
k. Parkway: A broad landscaped collector or arterial.
16.106.020
3. Except as provided for by this section, no street shall be given a name that is the same as,
similar to, or pronounced the same as any other street in the City unless that street is an
extension of an already-named street.
4. All proposed street names shall be approved, prior to use, by the City.
D. Preferred Street Names
Whenever practicable, historical names will be considered in the naming or renaming of
public roads. Historical factors to be considered shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
1. Original holders of Donation Land Claims in Sherwood.
2. Early homesteaders or settlers of Sherwood.
3. Heirs of original settlers or long-time (50 or more years) residents of Sherwood.
4. Explorers of or having to do with Sherwood.
5. Indian tribes of Washington County.
6. Early leaders and pioneers of eminence.
7. Names related to Sherwood's flora and fauna.
8. Names associated with the Robin Hood legend.
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 2, 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014; Ord. No. 2011-011, § 1,
10-4-2011)
16.106.020 Required Improvements
A. Generally
Except as otherwise provided, all developments containing or abutting an existing or
proposed street, that is either unimproved or substandard in right-of-way width or improve­
ment, shall dedicate the necessary right-of-way prior to the issuance of building permits and/or
complete acceptable improvements prior to issuance of occupancy permits. Right-of-way
requirements are based on functional classification of the street network as established in the
Transportation System Plan, Figure 17.
B. Existing Streets
Except as otherwise provided, when a development abuts an existing street, the improve­
ments requirement shall apply to that portion of the street right-of-way located between the
centerline of the right-of-way and the property line of the lot proposed for development. In no
event shall a required street improvement for an existing street exceed a pavement width of
thirty (30) feet.
C. Proposed Streets
1. Except as otherwise provided, when a development includes or abuts a proposed street,
in no event shall the required street improvement exceed a pavement width of forty (40)
feet.
2. Half Streets: When a half street is created, a minimum of 22 feet of driving surface shall
be provided by the developer.
D. Extent of Improvements
1. Streets required pursuant to this Chapter shall be dedicated and improved consistent
with Chapter 6 of the Community Development Plan, the TSP and applicable City
451 Supp. No. 18

16.106.020
specifications included in the City of Sherwood Construction Standards. Streets shall
include curbs, sidewalks, catch basins, street lights, and street trees. Improvements shall
also include any bikeways designated on the Transportation System Plan map. Appli­
cant may be required to dedicate land for required public improvements only when the
exaction is directly related to and roughly proportional to the impact of the develop­
ment, pursuant to Section 16.106.090.
2. If the applicant is required to provide street improvements, the City Engineer may
accept a future improvements guarantee in lieu of street improvements if one or more
of the following conditions exist, as determined by the City:
a. A partial improvement is not feasible due to the inability to achieve proper design
standards;
b. A partial improvement may create a potential safety hazard to motorists or
pedestrians.
c. Due to the nature of existing development on adjacent properties it is unlikely that
street improvements would be extended in the foreseeable future and the improve­
ment associated with the project under review does not, by itself, provide a signif­
icant improvement to street safety or capacity;
d. The improvement would be in conflict with an adopted capital improvement plan;
e. The improvement is associated with an approved land partition on property zoned
residential use and the proposed land partition does not create any new streets; or
f. Additional planning work is required to define the appropriate design standards for
the street and the application is for a project that would contribute only a minor
portion of the anticipated future traffic on the street.
E. Transportation Facilities Modifications
I. A modification to a standard contained within this Chapter and Section 16.58.010 and
the standard cross sections contained in Chapter 8 of the adopted TSP may be granted
in accordance with the procedures and criteria set out in this section.
2. A modification request concerns a deviation from the general design standards for
public facilities, in this Chapter, Section 16.58.010, or Chapter 8 in the adopted
Transportation System Plan. The standards that may be modified include but are not
limited to:
a. Reduced sight distances.
b. Vertical alignment.
c. Horizontal alignment.
d. Geometric design (length, width, bulb radius, etc.).
e. Design speed.
f. Crossroads.
g. Access policy.
h. A proposed alternative design which provides a plan superior to these standards.
i. Low impact development.
j. Access Management Plans
3. Modification Procedure
a. A modification shall be proposed with the application for land use approval.
b. A modification is processed as a Type II application. Modification requests shall be
processed in conjunction with the underlying development proposal.
Supp No 18 452

16.106.030
c. When a modification is requested to provide a green street element that is not
included in the Engineering Design Manual, the modification process will apply,
but the modification fee will be waived.
4. Criteria for Modification: Modifications may be granted when criterion 4a and any one
of criteria 4b through 4e are met:
a. Consideration shall be given to public safety, durability, cost of maintenance,
function, appearance, and other appropriate factors to advance the goals of the
adopted Sherwood Comprehensive Plan and Transportation System Plan as a
whole. Any modification shall be the minimum necessary to alleviate the hardship
or disproportional impact.
b. Topography, right-of-way, existing construction or physical conditions, or other
geographic conditions impose an unusual hardship on the applicant, and an
equivalent alternative which can accomplish the same design purpose is available.
c. A minor change to a specification or standard is required to address a specific
design or construction problem which, if not enacted, will result in an unusual
hardship. Self- imposed hardships shall not be used as a reason to grant a modifi­
cation request.
d. An alternative design is proposed which will provide a plan equal to or superior to
the existing street standards.
e. Application of the standards of this chapter to the development would be grossly
disproportional to the impacts created.
(Ord. No. 2018-003, § 2, 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014; Ord. No. 2011-011, § 1,
10-4-2011)
16.106.030 Location
A. Generally
The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, topographical conditions, and proposed land uses. The proposed street system
shall provide adequate, convenient and safe traffic and pedestrian circulation, and intersection
angles, grades, tangents, and curves shall be adequate for expected traffic volumes. Street
alignments shall be consistent with solar access requirements as per Chapter 16.156, and
topographical considerations.
B. Street Connectivity and Future Street Systems
1. Future Street Systems. The arrangement of public streets shall provide for the contin­
uation and establishment of future street systems as shown on the Local Street
Connectivity Map contained in the adopted Transportation System Plan (Figure 16).
2. Connectivity Map Required. New residential, commercial, and mixed use development
involving the construction of new streets shall be submitted with a site plan that
implements, responds to and expands on the Local Street Connectivity map contained
in the TSP.
a. A project is deemed to be consistent with the Local Street Connectivity map when
it provides a street connection in the general vicinity of the connection(s) shown on
the map, or where such connection is not practicable due to topography or other
physical constraints; it shall provide an alternate connection approved by the
decision-maker.
453 Supp. No. 18

16.106.030
b. Where a developer does not control all of the land that is necessary to complete a
planned street connection, the development shall provide for as much of the
designated connection as practicable and not prevent the street from continuing in
the future.
c. Where a development is disproportionately impacted by a required street connec­
tion, or it provides more than its proportionate share of street improvements along
property line (i.e., by building more than 3/4 width street), the developer shall be
entitled to System Development charge credits, as determined by the City Engineer.
d. Driveways that are more than 24 feet in width shall align with existing streets or
planned streets as shown in the Local Street Connectivity Map in the adopted
Transportation System Plan (Figure 17), except where prevented by topography,
rail lines, freeways, pre-existing development, or leases, easements, or covenants.
3. Block Length. For new streets except arterials, block length shall not exceed 530 feet.
The length of blocks adjacent to arterials shall not exceed 1,800 feet.
4. Where streets must cross water features identified in Title 3 of the Urban Growth
Management Functional Plan (UGMFP), provide crossings at an average spacing of
800 to 1,200 feet, unless habitat quality or length of crossing prevents a full street
connection.
5. Where full street connections over water features identified in Title 3 of the UGMFP
cannot be constructed in centers, main streets and station communities (including
direct connections from adjacent neighborhoods), or spacing of full street crossings
exceeds 1,200 feet, provide bicycle and pedestrian crossings at an average spacing of 530
feet, unless exceptional habitat quality or length of crossing prevents a connection.
6. Pedestrian and Bicycle Connectivity. Paved bike and pedestrian accessways consistent
with cross section standards in Figure 8-6 of the TSP shall be provided on public
easements or right- of-way when full street connections are not possible, with spacing
between connections of no more than 300 feet. Multi-use paths shall be built according
to the Pedestrian and Bike Master Plans in the adopted TSP.
7. Exceptions. Streets, bike, and pedestrian connections need not be constructed when any
of the following conditions exists:
a. Physical or topographic conditions make a street or accessway connection imprac­
ticable. Such conditions include but are not limited to freeways, railroads, steep
slopes, wetlands or other bodies of water where a connection could not reasonably
be provided.
b. Buildings or other existing development on adjacent lands physically preclude a
connection now or in the future considering the potential for redevelopment; or
c. Where streets or accessways would violate provisions of leases, easements, cove­
nants, restrictions or other agreements existing as of May 1, 1995, which preclude a
required street or accessway connection.
C. Underground Utilities
All public and private underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm water
drains, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of streets. Stubs for service connections shall
be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.
D. Additional Setbacks
Supp No 18 454

16.106.040
Generally additional setbacks apply when the width of a street right-of-way abutting a
development is less than the standard width under the functional classifications in Section VI of
the Community Development Plan. Additional setbacks are intended to provide unobstructed
area for future street right-of-way dedication and improvements, in conformance with Section
VI. Additional setbacks shall be measured at right angles from the centerline of the street.
Classification Additional Setback
1. Principle Arterial (99W) 61 feet
2. Arterial 37 feet
3. Collector 32 feet
4. Neighborhood Route 32 feet
5. Local 26 feet
(Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014; Ord. No. 2011-011, § 1, 10-4-2011)
16.106.040 Design
Standard cross sections showing street design and pavement dimensions are located in the
City of Sherwood's Engineering Design Manual.
A. Reserve Strips
Reserve strips or street plugs controlling access or extensions to streets are not allowed unless
necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights. All reserve
strips shall be dedicated to the appropriate jurisdiction that maintains the street.
B. Alignment
All proposed streets shall, as far as practicable, be in alignment with existing streets. In no
case shall the staggering of streets create a "T" intersection or a dangerous condition. Street
offsets of less than one hundred (100) feet are not allowed.
C. Future Extension
Where necessary to access or permit future subdivision or development of adjoining land,
streets must extend to the boundary of the proposed development and provide the required
roadway width. Dead-end streets less than 100' in length must comply with the Engineering
Design Manual.
A durable sign must be installed at the applicant's expense. The sign is required to notify the
public of the intent to construct future streets. The sign must read as follows: "This road will be
extended with future development. For more information contact the City of Sherwood
Engineering Department."
D. Intersection Angles
Streets shall intersect as near to ninety (90) degree angles as practical, except where topog­
raphy requires a lesser angle. In all cases, the applicant shall comply with the Engineering
Design Manual.
E. Cul-de-sacs
1. All cul-de-sacs shall be used only when exceptional topographical constraints,
existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code
preclude a street extension and circulation. A cul-de-sac shall not be more than two
hundred (200) feet in length and shall not provide access to more than 25 dwelling
units.
455 Supp. No. 16

16.106.040
2. All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a turnaround in accordance with the specifica­
tions in the Engineering Design Manual. The radius of circular turnarounds may
be larger when they contain a landscaped island, parking bay in their center,
Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue submits a written request, or an industrial use
requires a larger turnaround for truck access.
3. Public easements, tracts, or right-of-way shall provide paved pedestrian and bicycle
access ways at least 6 feet wide where a cul-de-sac or dead-end street is planned, to
connect the ends of the streets together, connect to other streets, or connect to other
existing or planned developments in accordance with the standards of this Chapter,
the TSP, the Engineering Design Manual or other provisions identified in this Code
for the preservation of trees.
F. Grades and Curves
Grades shall be evaluated by the City Engineer and comply with the Engineering Design
Manual.
G. Streets Adjacent to Railroads
Streets adjacent to railroads shall run approximately parallel to the railroad and be separated
by a distance suitable to allow landscaping and buffering between the street and railroad. Due
consideration shall be given at cross streets for the minimum distance required for f~ture grade
separations and to provide sufficient depth to allow screening of the railroad.
H. Buffering of Major Streets
Where a development abuts Highway 99W, or an existing or proposed principal arterial,
arterial or collector street, or neighborhood route, adequate protection for residential proper­
ties must be provided, through and local traffic be separated, and traffic conflicts minimized. In
addition, visual corridors pursuant to Section 16.142.040, and all applicable access provisions
of Chapter 16.96, are to be met. Buffering may be achieved by: parallel access streets, lots of
extra depth abutting the major street with frontage along another street, or other treatment
suitable to meet the objectives of this Code.
I. Median Islands
As illustrated in the adopted Transportation System Plan, Chapter 8, median islands may be
required on arterial or collector streets for the purpose of controlling access, providing
pedestrian safety or for aesthetic purposes.
J. Transit Facilities
Development along an existing or proposed transit route, as illustrated in Figure 7-2 in the
TSP, is required to provide areas and facilities for bus turnouts, shelters, and other transit­
related facilities to Tri-Met specifications. Transit facilities shall also meet the following
requirements:
1. Locate buildings within 20 feet of or provide a pedestrian plaza at major transit
stops.
2. Provide reasonably direct pedestrian connections between the transit stop and
building entrances on the site.
3. Provide a transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons (if not
already existing to transit agency standards).
4. Provide an easement or dedication for a passenger shelter and underground utility
connection from the new development to the transit amenity if requested by the
public transit provider.
Supp. No. 16 456

5. Provide lighting at a transit stop (if not already existing to transit agency stan-
dards).
K. Traffic Controls
1. Pursuant to Section 16.106.080, or as otherwise required by the City Engineer, an
application must include a traffic impact analysis to determine the number and types of
traffic controls necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic flow .
2. For all other proposed developments including commercial, industrial or institu-
tional uses with over an estimated 400 ADT , or as otherwise required by the City
Engineer, the application must include a traffic impact analysis to determine the
number and types of traffic controls necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic
flow .
L. Traffic Calming
1. The following roadway design features, including internal circulation drives, may be
required by the City in new construction in areas where traffic calming needs are
anticipated:
a. Curb extensions (bulb-outs).
b. Traffic diverters/circles.
c. Alternative paving and painting patterns.
d. Raised crosswalks, speed humps, and pedestrian refuges.
e. Other methods demonstrated as effective through peer reviewed Engineering
studies.
2. With approval of the City Engineer, traffic calming measures such as speed humps
and additional stop signs can be applied to mitigate traffic operations and/or safety
problems on existing streets. They should not be applied with new street construc-
tion unless approved by the City Engineer and Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue.
M. Vehicular Access Management
All developments shall have legal access to a public road. Access onto public streets
shall be permitted upon demonstration of compliance with the provisions of adopted
street standards in the Engineering Design Manual.
1. Measurement: See the following access diagram where R/W = Right-of-Way; and
P .I. = Point-of-Intersection where P .I. shall be located based upon a 90 degree angle
of intersection between ultimate right-of-way lines.
a. Minimum right-of-way radius at intersections shall conform to City standards.
b. All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall be governed by
sight distance requirements according to the Engineering Design Manual.
c. All minimum distances stated in the following sections shall be measured to the
nearest easement line of the access or edge of travel lane of the access on both
sides of the road.
d. All minimum distances between accesses shall be measured from existing or
approved accesses on both sides of the road.
e. Minimum spacing between driveways shall be measured from Point "C" to
Point "C" as shown below:
16.106.040
457 Supp. No. 21
2. Roadway Access
No use will be permitted to have direct access to a street or road except as specified
below . Access spacing shall be measured from existing or approved accesses on
either side of a street or road. The lowest functional classification street available
to the legal lot, including alleys within a public easement, shall take precedence for
new access points.
a. Local Streets:
Minimum right-of-way radius is fifteen (15) feet. Access will not be permit-
ted within ten (10) feet of Point "B," if no radius exists, access will not be
permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of Point "A." Access points near an
intersection with a Neighborhood Route, Collector or Arterial shall be
located beyond the influence of standing queues of the intersection in
accordance with AASHTO standards. This requirement may result in access
spacing greater than ten (10) feet.
b. Neighborhood Routes:
Minimum spacing between driveways (Point "C" to Point "C") shall be fifty
(50) feet with the exception of single family detached dwellings and middle
housing dwellings on residential lots in a recorded subdivision. Such lots
shall not be subject to a minimum spacing requirement between driveways
(Point "C" to Point "C"). In all instances, access points near an intersection
with a Neighborhood Route, Collector or Arterial shall be located beyond
the influence of standing queues of the intersection in accordance with
AASHTO standards. This requirement may result in access spacing greater
than fifty (50) feet.
c. Collectors:
All commercial, industrial and institutional uses with one-hundred-fifty
(150) feet or more of frontage will be permitted direct access to a Collector.
Uses with less than one-hundred-fifty (150) feet of frontage shall not be
permitted direct access to Collectors unless no other alternative exists.
Where joint access is available it shall be used, provided that such use is
consistent with Section 16.96.040, Joint Access. No use will be permitted
16.106.040
458Supp. No. 21
direct access to a Collector within one- hundred (100) feet of any present
Point "A." Minimum spacing between driveways (Point "C" to Point "C")
shall be one-hundred (100) feet. In all instances, access points near an
intersection with a Collector or Arterial shall be located beyond the influence
of standing queues of the intersection in accordance with AASHTO stan-
dards. This requirement may result in access spacing greater than one
hundred (100) feet.
d. Arterials and Highway 99W - Points of ingress or egress to and from Highway
99W and arterials designated on the Transportation Plan Map, attached as
Figure 1 of the Community Development Plan, Part II, shall be limited as
follows:
(1) Single familydetached dwellings, middle housing dwellings, and manufac-
tured homes on individual residential lots developed after the effective date
of this Code shall not be granted permanent driveway ingress or egress
from Highway 99W or arterials. If alternative public access is not available
at the time of development, provisions shall be made for temporary access
which shall be discontinued upon the availability of alternative access.
(2) Other private ingress or egress from Highway 99W and arterial roadways
shall be minimized. Where alternatives to Highway 99W or arterials exist or
are proposed, any new or altered uses developed after the effective date of
this Code shall be required to use the alternative ingress and egress. Alter-
natives include shared or crossover access agreement between properties,
consolidated access points, or frontage or backage roads. When alternatives
do not exist, access shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Access to Highway 99W shall be consistent with ODOT standards and
policies per OAR 734, Division 51, as follows: Direct access to an
arterial or principal arterial will be permitted provided that Point 'A' of
such access is more than six hundred (600) feet from any intersection
Point 'A' or other access to that arterial (Point 'C').
(b) The access to Highway 99W will be considered temporary until an
alternative access to public right-of-ways is created. When the alterna-
tive access is available the temporary access to Highway 99W shall be
closed.
(3) All site plans or Residential Design Checklists for new development sub-
mitted to the City for approval after the effective date of this Code shall
show ingress and egress from existing or planned local, neighborhood route
or collector streets, including frontage or backage roads, consistent with the
Transportation Plan Map and Chapter 6 of the Community Development
Plan.
3. Exceptions to Access Criteria for City-Owned Streets
a. Alternate points of access may be allowed if an access management plan which
maintains the classified function and integrity of the applicable facility is
submitted to and approved by the City Engineer as the access management plan
16.106.040
459 Supp. No. 21
must be included as part of the land use submittal or an application for
modification as described in § 16.106.020 E. (Transportation Facilities Modifi-
cations).
b. Access in the Old T own (OT) Overlay Zone
Access points in the OT Overlay Zone shown in an adopted plan such as the
Transportation System Plan, are not subject to the access spacing standards
and do not need a variance. However, the applicant shall submit a partial
access management plan for approval by the City Engineer. The approved
plan shall be implemented as a condition of development approval.
N. Private Streets
1. The construction of a private street serving a single-family residential development
is prohibited unless it provides principal access to two or fewer residential lots or
parcels (i.e. flag lots).
2. Provisions shall be made to assure private responsibility for future access and
maintenance through recorded easements. Unless otherwise specifically autho-
rized, a private street shall comply with the same standards as a public street
identified in the Community Development Code and the Transportation System
Plan.
3. A private street shall be distinguished from public streets and reservations or
restrictions relating to the private street shall be described in land division docu-
ments and deed records.
4. A private street shall also be signed differently from public streets and include the
words "Private Street".
(Ord. No. 2022-004, § 2, 6-13-2022; Ord. No. 2021-010, § 2, 12-7-2021; Ord. No. 2015-003, § 2,
3-17-2015; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014; Ord. No. 2011-011, § 1, 10-4-2011)
16.106.060 Sidewalks
A. Required Improvements
1. Except as otherwise provided, sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public
street and in any special pedestrian way within new development.
2. For Highway 99W , arterials, or in special industrial districts, the City Manager or
designee may approve a development without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes
are available.
3. In the case of approved cul-de-sacs serving less than fifteen (15) dwelling units,
sidewalks on one side only may be approved by the City Manager or designee.
B. Design Standards
1. Arterial and Collector Streets
Arterial and collector streets shall have minimum six (6) oreight (8) foot wide sidewalks/
multi-use paths, located as required by this Code. Residential areas shall have a
minimum of a six (6) foot wide sidewalk and commercial industrial areas shall have a
minimum of an eight (8) foot wide sidewalk.
2. Local Streets
Local streets shall have minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalks, located as required by
this Code.
16.106.040
460Supp. No. 21
3. Handicapped Ramps
Sidewalk handicapped ramps shall be provided at all intersections.
C. Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths
Provide bike and pedestrian connections on public easements or right-of-way when full street
connections are not possible, with spacing between connections of no more than 330 feet except
where prevented by topography, barriers such as railroads or highways, or environmental
constraints such as rivers and streams.
(Ord. No. 2018-007, § 2, 10-2-2018; Ord. No. 2011-011, § 1, 10-4-2011)
16.106.060
460.1 Supp. No. 21

16.106.080
16.106.070 Bike Lanes
If shown in Figure 13 of the Transportation System Plan, bicycle lanes shall be installed in
public rights-of-way, in accordance with City specifications. Bike lanes shall be installed on
both sides of designated roads, should be separated from the road by a twelve-inch stripe or
other means approved by Engineering Staff, and should be a minimum of five (5) feet wide.
(Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014; Ord. No. 2011-011, § I, 10-4-2011)
Editor's note-Ord. No 2014-012, ~ 3, adopted July 17. 2014, amended the Code by repealing former~ 16 106.070 m its entirety,
and renumbermg former~ 16.106.080 as a new~ 16.106.070. Former~ 16.106.070 pertamed to the Hwy 99W Capacity Allocation
Program (CAP). and derived from Ord. No. 2011-011, adopted October 4, 2011.
16.106.080 Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to implement Sections 660-012-0045(2)(b) and -0045(2)(e) of
the State Transportation Planning Rule (TPR), which require the City to adopt performance
standards and a process to apply conditions to land use proposals in order to minimize impacts
on and protect transportation facilities. This section establishes requirements for when a traffic
impact analysis (TIA) must be prepared and submitted; the analysis methods and content
involved in a TIA; criteria used to review the TIA; and authority to attach conditions of
approval to minimize the impacts of the proposal on transportation facilities.
This section refers to the TSP for performance standards for transportation facilities as well
as for projects that may need to be constructed as mitigation measures for a proposal's projected
impacts. This section also relies on the City's Engineering Design Manual to provide street
design standards and construction specifications for improvements and projects that may be
constructed as part of the proposal and mitigation measures approved for the proposal.
B. Applicability
A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be required to be submitted to the City with a land use
application at the request of the City Engineer or if the proposal is expected to involve one ( 1)
or more of the following:
1. An amendment to the Sherwood Comprehensive Plan or zoning map.
2. A new direct property approach road to Highway 99W is proposed.
3. The proposed development generates fifty (50) or more PM peak-hour trips on High­
way 99W, or one hundred (100) PM peak-hour trips on the local transportation system.
4. An increase in use of any adjacent street or direct property approach road to Highway
99W by ten ( 10) vehicles or more per day that exceed the twenty thousand-pound gross
vehicle weight.
5. The location of an existing or proposed access driveway does not meet minimum
spacing or sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving
the property are restricted, or such vehicles are likely to queue or hesitate at an
approach or access connection, thereby creating a safety hazard.
6. A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as back up
onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach area.
C. Requirements
The following are typical requirements that may be modified in coordination with Engineer­
ing Staff based on the specific application.
1. Pre-application Conference. The applicant shall meet with the City Engineer prior to
submitting an application that requires a TIA. This meeting will be coordinated with
461 Supp No. 15

16.106.080
Washington County and ODOT when an approach road to a County road or Highway
99W serves the property, so that the TIA will meet the requirements of all relevant
agencies.
2. Preparation. The TIA shall be prepared by an Oregon Registered Professional Engineer
qualified to perform traffic Engineering analysis and will be paid for by the applicant.
3. Typical Average Daily Trips and Peak Hour Trips. The latest edition of the Trip
Generation Manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE),
shall be used to gauge PM peak hour vehicle trips, unless a specific trip generation study
that is approved by the City Engineer indicates an alternative trip generation rate is
appropriate.
4. Intersection-level Analysis. Intersection-level analysis shall occur at every intersection
where the analysis shows that fifty (50) or more peak hour vehicle trips can be expected
to result from the development.
5. Transportation Planning Rule Compliance. The requirements of OAR 660-012-0060
shall apply to those land use actions that significantly affect the transportation system,
as defined by the Transportation Planning Rule.
D. Study Area
The following facilities shall be included in the study area for all TIAs:
1. All site-access points and intersections (signalized and unsignalized) adjacent to the
proposed development site. If the site fronts an arterial or collector street, the analysis
shall address all intersections and driveways along the site frontage and within the
access spacing distances extending out from the boundary of the site frontage.
2. Roads and streets through and adjacent to the site.
3. All intersections needed for signal progression analysis.
4. In addition to these requirements, the City Engineer may require analysis of any
additional intersections or roadway links that may be adversely affected as a result of
the proposed development.
E. Analysis Periods
To adequately assess the impacts of a proposed land use action, the following study periods,
or horizon years, should be addressed in the transportation impact analysis where applicable:
1. Existing Year.
2. Background Conditions in Project Completion Year. The conditions in the year in
which the proposed land use action will be completed and occupied, but without the
expected traffic from the proposed land use action. This analysis should account for all
City-approved developments that are expected to be fully built out in the proposed land
use action horizon year, as well as all planned transportation system improvements.
3. Full Buildout Conditions in Project Completion Year. The background condition plus
traffic from the proposed land use action assuming full build-out and occupancy.
4. Phased Years of Completion. If the project involves construction or occupancy in
phases, the applicant shall assess the expected roadway and intersection conditions
resulting from major development phases. Phased years of analysis will be determined
in coordination with City staff.
Supp. No 15 462

16.106.090
5. Twenty-Year or TSP Horizon Year. For planned unit developments, comprehensive
plan amendments or zoning map amendments, the applicant shall assess the expected
future roadway, intersection, and land use conditions as compared to approved com­
prehensive planning documents.
F. Approval Criteria
When a TIA is required, a proposal is subject to the following criteria, in addition to all
criteria otherwise applicable to the underlying land use proposal:
1. The analysis complies with the requirements of 16.106.080.C;
2. The analysis demonstrates that adequate transportation facilities exist to serve the
proposed development or identifies mitigation measures that resolve identified traffic
safety problems in a manner that is satisfactory to the City Engineer and, when County
or State highway facilities are affected, to Washington County and ODOT;
3. For affected non-highway facilities, the TIA demonstrates that mobility and other
applicable performance standards established in the adopted City TSP have been met;
and
4. Proposed public improvements are designed and will be constructed to the street
standards specified in Section 16.106.010 and the Engineering Design Manual, and to
the access standards in Section 16.106.040.
5. Proposed public improvements and mitigation measures will provide safe connections
across adjacent right-of-way (e.g., protected crossings) when pedestrian or bicycle
facilities are present or planned on the far side of the right-of-way.
G. Conditions of Approval
The City may deny, approve, or approve a development proposal with conditions needed to
meet operations and safety standards and provide the necessary right-of-way and improve­
ments to ensure consistency with the future planned transportation system. Improvements
required as a condition of development approval, when not voluntarily provided by the
applicant, shall be roughly proportional to the impact of the development on transportation
facilities, pursuant to Section 16.106.090. Findings in the development approval shall indicate
how the required improvements are directly related to and are roughly proportional to the
impact of development.
(Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014)
16.106.090 Rough Proportionality
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to ensure that required transportation facility improvements
are roughly proportional to the potential impacts of the proposed development. The rough
proportionality requirements of this section apply to both frontage and non-frontage improve­
ments. A proportionality analysis will be conducted by the City Engineer for any proposed
development that triggers transportation facility improvements pursuant to this chapter. The
City Engineer will take into consideration any benefits that are estimated to accrue to the
development property as a result of any required transportation facility improvements. A
proportionality determination can be appealed pursuant to Chapter 16.76. The following
general provisions apply whenever a proportionality analysis is conducted.
B. Mitigation of impacts due to increased demand for transportation facilities associated with
the proposed development shall be provided in rough proportion to the transportation
463 Supp. No. 15

16.106.090
impacts of the proposed development. When applicable, anticipated impacts will be
determined by the TIA in accordance with Section 16.106.080. When no TIA is required,
anticipated impacts will be determined by the City Engineer.
C. The following shall be considered when determining proportional improvements:
1. Condition and capacity of existing facilities within the impact area in relation to City
standards. The impact area is generally defined as the area within a one-half-mile radius
of the proposed development. If a TIA is required, the impact area is the TIA study
area.
2. Existing vehicle, bicycle, pedestrian, and transit use within the impact area.
3. The effect of increased demand on transportation facilities and other approved, but not
yet constructed, development projects within the impact area that is associated with the
proposed development.
4. Applicable TSP goals, policies, and plans.
5. Whether any route affected by increased transportation demand within the impact area
is listed in any City program including school trip safety; neighborhood traffic man­
agement; capital improvement; system development improvement, or others.
6. Accident history within the impact area.
7. Potential increased safety risks to transportation facility users, including pedestrians
and cyclists.
8. Potential benefit the development property will receive as a result of the construction of
any required transportation facility improvements.
9. Other considerations as may be identified in the review process pursuant to Chapter
16.72.
(Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 7-17-2014)
[The next page 1s 467] Supp No 15 464

Sections:
Chapter 16.108
