INFILL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS*
Sections:
16.68.010 Purpose and Intent
16.68.020 Lot Sizes and Dimensions for Infill
16.68.030 Building Design on Infill Lots
16.68.040 Height
16.68.050 Yard Requirements for Infill Development
16.68.060 Public Notice
* Editor's Note: Some sections may not contain a history.
16.68.010 Purpose and Intent
This chapter provides standards for infill development, or the development of properties that
have been skipped over by larger subdivisions and, due to their proximity to established
residential neighborhoods, require special design controls and flexibility in the City's zoning
and land division standards. This Chapter is intended to:
A. Promote housing choice, transportation efficiency and compatibility between existing
residential areas and new development;
B. Allow for greater flexibility in lot size, dimensions and setbacks; and
C. Control the type, height, size and scale of new buildings on infill properties.
16.68.020 Lot Sizes and Dimensions for Infill
The Approval Authority may approve modifications to the minimum lot size and/or lot
dimensions of this Code for residential developments containing less than five (5) acres (i.e., is
not otherwise eligible for a Planned Unit Development), subject to all of the following
requirements:
A. Lot area may be reduced below the minimum standard of the applicable zoning district
through the land division or lot line adjustment process when the Approval Authority
finds:
1. The resulting lot size(s) and dimensions are not less than eighty-five percent (85%)
of the standard minimum lot area of the zone; and
2. The resulting average lot size of the development (partition or subdivision) shall be
no less than the minimum lot size of the zone in which it is located; the resulting
density shall be no more than the allowable density of the zone. Areas reserved as
open space, such as central greens, plaza, and other common open space may be
counted toward the average lot size and density of the development when such areas_
are centrally located and accessible to every lot in the development; and;
3. The reduction in lot size and/or dimensions shall not be detrimental to any
designated natural feature; the Approval Authority may require mitigation to
protect and enhance such features, as applicable; and
4. All required local street connections, pedestrian access ways, utility easements,
emergency access, and other Code requirements are met; the Approval Authority
Supp. No. 16 378

may require shared driveways (i.e., for two dwellings) for paired lots that individ-
ually have less than 40 feet of street frontage, except where driveway access is
provided from an alley; and
5. The land division shall be conditioned, and a deed restriction recorded on each lot
that contains less than the minimum lot size of the zone, requiring that building
elevations and floor plans be submitted to the Planning Department for review and
approval prior to issuance of a building permit on such lot, and such plans be
binding on future building. Building plans required under this section shall meet the
following standards as provided in Section 16.68.030;
a. Floor area ratio
b. Side setback plane; and
c. Garage orientation and design standards
6. The land division shall be conditioned, and a deed restriction shall be recorded on
each lot that contains less than the minimum lot size of the zone, requiring that a
landscape plan be submitted to the Planning Department for review and approval
prior to issuance of a building permit on such lot. Landscape plans required under
this section shall provide plant materials and irrigation that are equal to or better
than those existing residential landscapes in the vicinity . The Approval Authority
may consider plant species, quantity/volume of plant material, irrigation, slope,
aspect, soil, and other relevant factors in determining the adequacy of landscape
plans and in requiring additional landscaping.
B. Lot dimension(s) may be reduced below the minimum standards of the applicable
zoning district through the land division or lot line adjustment process provided that
the development conforms to Section 16.68.020A, above, and all other applicable Code
requirements are met.
C. Lot width and frontage standards may be waived for rear lots created through parti-
tioning where an access easement or tract of not less than twenty (20) feet in width
connects the subject lot to a public street with a driveway meeting City standards and
the yard requirements for rear lots, as provided in Section 16.68.050, are met. The
Approval Authority may require that such driveway be dedicated as a public alley and
extended in accordance with local street network plans and connectivity requirements.
(Ord. No. 2022-004, § 2, 6-13-2022; Ord. No. 2010-015, § 2, 10-5-2010)
16.68.030 Building Design on Infill Lots
Structures exceeding twenty four (24) feet in height shall conform to the following standards:
A. Floor Area: Floor area in any dwelling with a height greater than twenty four (24) feet
shall not exceed the following floor area ratios, except that the first 200 square feet of
floor area in a detached garage or other accessory structure shall be exempt, when the
accessory structure is located behind a dwelling (dwelling is between accessory structure
and abutting street), the lot is not a through lot, and the accessory structure does not
exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. Floor area shall not exceed:
1. Low Density Residential (LDR): 50% of lot area
2. Medium Density Residential Low (MDRL): 55% of lot area
3. Medium Density Residential High (MDRH): 60% of lot area
4. High Density Residential (HDR): 65% of lot area
16.68.030
379 Supp. No. 21
5. The floor area standards in this section do not apply to cottage clusters.
B. Interior Side Setback and Side Y ard Plane. When a structure exceed twenty four (24)
feet in height:
1. The minimum interior side setback is five (5) feet, provided that elevations or
portions of elevations exceeding twenty four (24) feet in height shall be setback
from interior property line(s) an additional one-half (
1/2) foot for every one (1) foot
in height over twenty four (24) feet (see example below); and
2. All interior side elevations exceeding twenty four (24) feet in height shall be divided
into smaller areas or planes to minimize the appearance of bulk to properties
abutting the side elevation: When the side elevation of such a structure is more than
750 square feet in area, the elevation shall be divided into distinct planes of 750
square feet or less. For the purposes of this standard, a distinct plane is an elevation
or a portion of an elevation that is separated from other wall planes, resulting in a
recessed or projecting section of the structure that projects or recedes at least two
(2) feet from the adjacent plane, for a length of at least six (6) feet. The maximum
side yard plane may be increased by ten percent (10%) for every additional five (5)
feet of side yard setback provided beyond the five (5) foot minimum.
C. Garage Orientation. On lots with a minimum width of sixty (60) feet or less, the garage
shall meet the following orientation and design standards:
1. The garage shall not be located closer to the street than the dwelling, unless the
combined width of garage opening(s) does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
total width of the front (street-facing) elevation. For the purpose of meeting this
standard, the exterior wall of at least one room of habitable space, which may
include habitable space above the garage, shall be located closer to the street than
the garage door. Any garage opening width beyond fifty percent (50%) standard
shall be set back at least (2) feet further from the front property line than the facade
of the other garage volume. Alternatively, and subject to the Approval Authority's
approval, the front elevation may incorporate a decorative trellis, pergola or other
architectural feature that provides a shadow line giving the perception that the
garage opening is recessed;
2. The standard in subsection c.1. above, does not apply where the average slope of a
parcel of a lot exceeds twenty percent (20%) where the garage is proposed to be set
back at least forty (40) feet from the public right-of-way, or where the garage is to be
accessed from an alley;
16.68.030
380Supp. No. 21
3. When the side or rear elevation of a front-loading garage is exposed to the street or
an abutting property, such elevation(s) shall have more than one plane (offset or
projection of 2 feet or more) or shall have window area equal to at least ten percent
(10%) of the exposed garage wall.
(Ord. No. 2022-004, § 2, 6-13-2022; Ord. No. 2010-015, § 2, 10-5-2010)
16.68.040 Height
The maximum heights specified in the underlying zone shall be the maximum height for any
infill development.
16.68.050 Yard Requirements for Infill Development
The Approval Authority may approve modifications to the minimum yard dimensions of
this Code for residential developments containing less than five (5) acres (i.e., is not otherwise
eligible for a Planned Unit Development), subject to all of the following requirements:
A. Side and/or rear yard(s) may be reduced below the minimum standard of the applicable
zoning district when the Approval Authority finds:
1. The resulting yard(s) is/are not less than eighty-five percent (85%) of the standard
of the zone; and
2. Where a side or rear yard abuts another residential property outside the subject
development, it shall not be reduced to less than eighty five percent (85%) of the
abutting yard dimension, except where the yard of the abutting property is less than
the minimum standard of the zone, in which case a reduction equal to the yard of
the abutting property may be permitted. In no case shall a yard of less than five (5)
feet be permitted unless the structure is approved as a zero-lot line or common wall
dwelling; and
3. The reduction in yard dimension shall not be detrimental to any designated natural
feature; the Approval Authority may require mitigation to protect and enhance
such features, as applicable; and
4. All required local street connections, pedestrian access ways, utility easements,
emergency access, and other Code requirements are met.
B. Front yards may be reduced below the minimum standard of the applicable zoning
district when the Approval Authority finds:
1. The front yard is reduced by no more than six (6) feet; and
2. All garage openings are setback twenty (20) feet or more from all street rights-of-
way .
3. The reduction is to accommodate an unenclosed front porch; or
4. The reduction is necessary to protect natural features on or adjacent to the subject
lot; or
5. The reduction allows for greater separation or buffering between infill development
and existing residential uses(s) at lower densities (or larger lot sizes).
C. Rear lots, also known as flag lots, are those that have less than twenty five (25) feet of
street frontage, are oriented with their buildable area (flag) behind another lot that has
standard street frontage, and receives access from a narrow strip of land (flag pole). The
Approval Authority may approve a rear lot only upon finding that it has sufficient lot
area after excluding the access drive (easement, tract, or flag pole), it meets emergency
16.68.050
381 Supp. No. 21
access and circulation requirements, and side lot lines adjacent to the access drive have
adequate landscape buffering in accordance with Section 16.58.020D. Where two rear
lots are proposed contiguous to one another, the Approval Authority may require the
two lots share a common access and driveway to reduce the number of curb cuts and
turning movement conflicts and to minimize impervious surfaces.
D. In approving reductions to yard dimensions, the Approval Authority must find that the
provisions of Sections 16.68.030 through 16.68.050, and all other applicable Code
requirements, are met.
(Ord. No. 2010-015, § 2, 10-5-2010)
16.68.060 Public Notice
The public shall be notified of pending land use applications for projects that are subject to
Chapter 16.68, consistent with the provisions of Section 16.72.020, Mailed Notice.
(Ord. 2006-021)
16.68.050
382Supp. No. 21
Division III.  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
