OLD TOWN (OT) OVERLAY DISTRICT*
Sections:
16.162.010 Purpose
16.162.020 Objectives
16.162.030 Permitted Uses
16.162.040 Conditional Uses
16.162.050 Prohibited Uses
16.162.060 Dimensional Standards
16.162.070 Community Design
16.162.020
16.162.080 Standards for All Commercial, Institutional and Mixed-Use Structures in the
Old Cannery Area.
16.162.090 Old Town Smockville Design Standards
16.162.100 Architectural Guidelines.
* Editor's Note: Some sect10ns may not contain a history.
16.162.010 Purpose
The Old Town (OT) Overlay District is intended to establish objectives and define a set of
development standards to guide physical development in the historic downtown of the City
consistent with the Community Development Plan and this Code.
The OT zoning district is an overlay district generally applied to property identified on the
Old Town Overlay District Map, and applied to the Sherwood Plan and Zone Map in the
Smockville Subdivision and surrounding residential and commercial properties, generally
known as Old Town. The OT overlay zone recognizes the unique and significant characteristics
of Old Town, and is intended to provide development flexibility with respect to uses, site size,
setbacks, heights, and site design elements, in order to preserve and enhance the area's
commercial viability and historic character. The OT overlay zone is designated a historic district
as per Chapters 16.166 and 16.168. Furthermore, the OT District is divided into two distinct
areas, the "Smockville" and the "Old Cannery Area," which have specific criteria or standards
related to architectural design, height, and off-street parking. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2; 2002-1128 § 3;
94-990; 92-946; 87-859)
16.162.020 Objectives
Land use applications within the Old Town Overlay District must demonstrate substantial
conformance with the standards and criteria below:
A. Encourage development that is compatible with the existing natural and man-made
environment, existing community activity patterns, and community identity.
B. Minimize or eliminate adverse visual, aesthetic or environmental effects caused by the
design and location of new development, including but not limited to effects from:
1. The scale, mass, height, areas, appearances and architectural design of buildings
and other development structures and features.
2. Vehicular and pedestrian ways and parking areas.
470.75 Supp No. 20

16.162.020
3. Existing or proposed alteration of natural topographic features, vegetation and
waterways. (Ord. 2002-1128 § 3; 94-990)
16.162.030 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted outright, provided such uses meet the applicable environ­
mental performance standards contained in Division VIII:
A. Uses permitted outright in the RC zone, Section 16.28.020; the HDR zone, Section
16.20.020; and the MDRL zone, Section 16.16.020; provided that uses permitted
outright on any given property are limited to those permitted in the underlying zoning
district, unless otherwise specified by this Section and Section 16.162.040. (Ord.
2006-009 § 2)
B. In addition to the home occupations permitted under Section 16.42.020, antique and
curio shops, cabinet making, arts and crafts galleries, artists cooperatives, and book­
shops, are permitted subject to the standards of Chapter 16.42 and this Chapter, in
either the underlying RC or MDRL zones.
C. Boarding and rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, and similar accommodations,
containing not more than five (5) guest rooms, in the underlying RC, HDR and MDRL
zones.
D. Motels and hotels, in the underlying RC zone only.
E. Residential apartments when located on upper or basement floors, to the rear of, or
otherwise clearly secondary to commercial buildings, in the underlying RC zone only.
F. Other similar commercial uses or similar home occupations, subject to Chapter 16.88.
G. Offices or architects, artists, attorneys, dentists, engineers, physicians, accountants,
consultants and similar professional services.
H. Uses permitted outright in the RC zone are allowed within the HDR zone when limited
to the first floor, adjacent to and within 100 feet of, Columbia Street within the Old
Town Overlay District. (Ord. 2002-1128 § 3; 94-990; 92-946; 87-859)
16.162.040 Conditional Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses, provided such uses meet the applicable
environmental performance standards contained in Division VIII, and are approved in accor­
dance with Chapter 16.82:
A. Uses permitted as conditional uses in the RC zone, Section 16.28.020, HDR zone,
Section 16.20.020, and the MDRL zone, Section 16.16.020, provided that uses permit­
ted as conditional uses on any given property are limited to those permitted in the
underlying zoning district, unless otherwise specified by Section 16.162.030 and this
Section.
B. Townhouses on property zoned RC in the Old Cannery area subject to HDR standards
and Chapter 16.14. In addition, any garages shall use alley access. RC zone setback
standards may be used in lieu of other applicable standards.
C. Public and commercial (non-accessory) parking within residential zoning districts
when both of the following apply:
1. On May 1, 2016, no buildings existed on the property where the parking is to be
located; and
Supp No 20 470.76

16.162.060
2. The property has street frontage on an arterial and/or collector street as identified
within the Sherwood Transportation System Plan.
(Ord. No. 2021-010, § 2, 12-7-2021; Ord. No. 2017-001, § 1, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. 2016-010, § 2,
6-21-2016; Ord. 2006-009 § 2; Ord. 2002-1128 § 3; 94-990; 92-946; 87-859)
16.162.050 Prohibited Uses
The following uses are expressly prohibited in the OT overlay zone, notwithstanding whether
such uses are permitted outright or conditionally in the underlying RC, HDR or MDRL zones:
A. Adult entertainment businesses.
B. Manufactured homes on individual lots.
C. Manufactured home parks.
D. Restaurants with drive-through. (Ord. 2002-1128 § 3; 94-990; 92-946; 87-859)
E. Stand alone cellular or wireless communication towers and facilities. Co-location of
existing legally permitted facilities is acceptable. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
16.162.060 Dimensional Standards
In the OT overlay zone, the dimensional standards of the underlying RC, HDR and MDRL
zones shall apply, with the following exceptions:
A. Lot Dimensions - Minimum lot area (RC zoned property only): Twenty-five hundred
(2,500) square feet.
B. Setbacks - Minimum yards (RC zoned property only): None, including structures
adjoining a residential zone, provided that Uniform Building Code, Fire District
regulations, and the site design standards of this Code, not otherwise varied by this
Chapter, are met.
C. Height - The purpose of this standard is to encourage 2 to 4 story mixed-use buildings
in the Old Town area consistent with a traditional building type of ground floor active
uses with housing or office uses above.
Except as provided in Section 16.162.080, subsection C below, the maximum height of
structures in RC zoned property shall be forty ( 40) feet (3 stories) in the "Smockville
Area" and fifty (50) feet (4 stories) in the "Old Cannery Area". Limitations in the RC
zone to the height of commercial structures adjoining residential zones, and allowances
for additional building height as a conditional use, shall not apply in the OT overlay
zone. However, five foot height bonuses are allowed under strict conditions. Chimneys,
solar and wind energy devices, radio and TV antennas, and similar devices may exceed
height limitations in the OT overlay zone by ten ( 10) feet.
Minimum height: A principal building in the RC and HDR zones must be at least
sixteen (16) feet in height. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
D. Coverage - Home occupations permitted as per Chapter 16.42 and Section 16.162.030
may occupy up to fifty percent (5Qlj,;>) of the entire floor area of all buildings on a lot.
(Ord. 2002-1128 § 3; 94-946; 87-859)
470.77 Supp. No 20

16.162.070
16.162.070 Community Design
Standards relating to off-street parking and loading, environmental resources, landscaping,
historic resources, access and egress, signs, parks and open space, on-site storage, and site design
as per Divisions V, VIII and this Division shall apply, in addition to the Old Town design
standards below:
A. Generally
In reviewing site plans, as required by Chapter 16.90, the City shall utilize the design
standards of Section 16.162.080 for the "Old Cannery Area" and the "Smockville
Design Standards" for all proposals in that portion of the Old Town District.
B. Landscaping for Residential Structures
1. Perimeter screening and buffering, as per Section 16.92.030, is not required for
approved home occupations.
2. Minimum landscaped areas are not required for off-street parking for approved
home occupations.
3. Landscaped strips, as per Sections 16.92.030 and 16.142.030.A, may be a minimum
of five (5) feet in width, except when adjoining alleys, where landscaped strips are
not required.
4. Fencing and interior landscaping, as per Section 16.92.030, are not required.
C. Off-Street Parking
For all property and uses within the "Smockville Area" of the Old Town Overlay
District off-street parking is not required. For all property and uses within the "Old
Cannery Area" of the Old Town Overlay District, requirements for off-street automo­
bile parking shall be no more than sixty-five percent ( 65'1/c,) of that normally required by
Section 16.94.020. Shared or joint use parking agreements may be approved, subject to
the standards of Section 16.94.010.
D. Off-Street Loading
1. Off-street loading spaces for commercial uses in the "Old Cannery Area" may be
shared and aggregated in one or several locations in a single block, provided that the
minimum area of all loading spaces in a block, when taken together, shall not be less
than sixty-five percent (65%) of the minimum standard that is otherwise required
by Section 16.94.030.B.
2. For all property and uses within the "Smockville Area" of the Old Town Overlay
District, off-street loading is not required.
E. Signs - In addition to signs otherwise permitted for home occupations, as per Section
16.142.101 one (1) non-illuminated, attached, exterior sign, up to a maximum of nine
(9) square feet in surface area, may be permitted for each approved home occupation.
See also Chapters 16.100, Permanent Signs and 16.102 Temporary, Portable, and
Banner Signs.
F. Non-conforming Uses - When a nonconforming lot, use, or structure within the OT
overlay zone has been designated a landmark as per Chapter 16.166, or when a
nonconforming lot within the OT overlay zone is vacant, and the proposed change will,
in the City's determination, be fully consistent with the goals and standards of the OT
Supp No 20 470.78

16.162.080
overlay zone and other City guidelines to preserve, restore, and enhance historic
resources, nonconforming use restrictions contained in Chapter 16.48 may be waived
by the Commission.
G. Downtown Street Standards - All streets shall conform to the Downtown Street
Standards in the City of Sherwood Transportation System Plan and Downtown
Streetscape Master Plan, and as hereafter amended. Streetscape improvements shall
conform to the Construction Standards and Specifications, and as hereafter amended.
H. Color - The color of all exterior materials shall be earth tone. A color palette shall be
submitted and reviewed as part of the land use application review process and approved
by the hearing authority.
(Ord. No. 2020-005, § 2, 9-7-2021; Ord. 2006-009, § 2; 2002-1128, § 3; 94-990; 92-946; 87-859)
16.162.080 Standards for All Commercial, Institutional and Mixed-Use Structures in the
Old Cannery Area.
The standards in this section apply to development of all new principal commercial,
institutional and mixed-use structures in the "Old Cannery Area" of the Old Town Overlay
District. These standards also apply to exterior alterations in this zone, when the exterior
alteration requires full compliance with the requirements of applicable building codes. (Ord.
2006-009 § 2)
A. Building Placement and the Street. The purpose of this standard is to create an
attractive area when commercial or mixed-use structures are set back from the property
line. Landscaping, an arcade, or a hard-surfaced expansion of the pedestrian path must
be provided between a structure and the street.
Structures built to the street lot line are exempt from the requirements of this subsec­
tion. Where there is more than one street lot line, only those frontages where the
structure is built to the street lot line are exempt from the requirements of this
paragraph. All street-facing elevations must comply with one of the following options:
1. Option 1: Foundation landscaping. All street-facing elevations must have landscap­
ing along their foundation. This landscaping requirement does not apply to por­
tions of the building facade that provide access for pedestrian or vehicles to the
building. The foundation landscaping must meet the following standards:
a. The landscaped area must be at least thirty (30'1/ii) of the linear street frontage.
b. There must be at least one ( 1) three-gallon shrub for every 3 lineal feet of
foundation in the landscaped area; and,
c. Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.
2. Option 2: Arcade. All street-facing elevations must have an arcade as a part of the
primary structure, meeting the following requirements:
a. The arcade must be at least four (4) feet deep between the front elevation and
the parallel building wall. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
b. The arcade must consist of one or a series of arched openings that are at least
six (6) feet wide. The arcade, or combination of them, should cover a minimum
of sixty ( 60%) of the street facing elevation;
c. The arcade elevation facing a street must be at least fourteen ( 14) feet in height
and at least twenty-five percent (25%) solid, but no more than fifty percent
(50%) solid; and,
470.79 Supp No 20

16.162.080
d. The arcade must be open to the air on 3 sides; none of the arcade's street facing or end
openings may be blocked with walls, glass, lattice, glass block or any other material;
and,
e. Each dwelling that occupies space adjacent to the arcade must have its main entrance
opening into the arcade.
3. Option 3: Hard-surface sidewalk extension. The area between the building and the street
lot line must be hard-surfaced for use by pedestrians as an extension of the sidewalk:
a. The building walls may be set back no more than six ( 6) feet from the street lot line.
b. For each one-hundred ( 100) square feet of hard-surface area between the building and
the street lot line at least one of the following amenities must be provided.
( 1) A bench or other seating.
(2) A tree.
(3) A landscape planter.
( 4) A drinking fountain.
(5) A kiosk.
B. Reinforce the Comer. The purpose of this standard is to emphasize the comers of buildings at
public street intersections as special places with high levels of pedestrian activity and visual
interest. On structures with at least two frontages on the comer where two city walkways meet,
the building must comply with at least two of these options.
Option 1: The primary structures on comer lots at the property lines must be at or within
6 feet of both street lot lines. Where a site has more than one comer, this requirement must be
met on only one comer.
Option 2: The highest point of the building's street-facing elevations at a location must be
within 25 feet of the comer.
Option 3: The location of a main building entrance must be on a street-facing wall and
either at the comer, or within 25 feet of the comer.
Option 4: There is no on-site parking or access drives within 40 feet of the comer.
Option 5: Buildings shall incorporate a recessed entrance( s) or open foyer( s ), a minimum
of 3 feet in depth to provide architectural variation to the facade. Such entrance(s) shall be a
minimum of ten percent ( 10%) of the ground-floor linear street frontage.
C. Residential Buffer. The purpose of this standard is to provide a transition in scale where the Old
Cannery Area is adjacent to a lower density residential zone, outside the District. Where a site
in the Old Cannery Area abuts or is across a street from a residential zone, the following is
required: (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
1. On sites that directly abut a residential zone the following must be met:
a. In the portion of the site within 25 feet of the residential zone, the building height
limits are those of the adjacent residential zone; and,
b. A 6-foot deep area landscaped with, at a minimum, the materials listed in Section
16.92.030B is required along the property line abutting or across the street from the
lower density residential zone. Pedestrian and bicycle access is allowed, but may not
be more than 6 feet wide. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
470-81 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.080
D. Main Entrance. The purpose of this standard is to locate and design building entrances that are
safe, accessible from the street, and have weather protection.
1. Location of main entrance. The main entrance of the principal structure must face a
public street (or, where there is more than one street lot line, may face the comer). For
residential developments these are the following exceptions:
a. For buildings that have more than one main entrance, only one entrance must meet this
requirement.
b. Entrances that face a shared landscaped courtyard are exempt from this requirement.
2. Front porch design requirement. There must be a front porch at the main entrance to
residential portions of a mixed-use development, if the main entrance faces a street. If the
porch projects out from the building it must have a roof. If the roof of a required porch is
developed as a deck or balcony it may be flat, otherwise it must be articulated and
pitched. If the main entrance is to a single dwelling unit, the covered area provided by the
porch must be at least six (6) feet wide and six (6) feet deep. If the main entrance is to a
porch that provides the entrance to two or more dwelling units, the covered area provided
by the porch must be at least 9 feet wide and 8 feet deep. No part of any porch may
project into the public right-of-way or public utility easements, but may project into a
side yard consistent with Section 16.60.040. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
E. Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. The purpose of this standard is to emphasize the
traditional development pattern in Old Town where buildings connect to the street, and where
off-street vehicular parking and loading areas are of secondary importance.
1. Access to off-street parking areas and adjacent residential zones - Access to off-street
parking and loading areas must be located at least twenty (20) feet from any adjacent
residential zone.
2. Parking lot coverage - No more than fifty percent (50%) of the site may be used for off­
street parking and loading areas.
3. Vehicle screening - Where off-street parking and loading areas are across a local street
from a residential zone, there must be a 6-foot wide landscaped area along the street lot
line that meets the material requirements in Section 16.92.020B. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
F. Exterior Finish Materials. The purpose of this standard is to encourage high quality materials
that are complementary to the traditional materials used in Old Town.
1. Plain or painted concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, full-sheet plywood,
fiberboard or sheet pressboard (i.e. T-111 ), vinyl and aluminum siding, and synthetic
stucco (i.e. DryVit and stucco board), are not allowed as exterior finish material, except
as secondary finishes if they cover no more than ten percent (10%) of a surface area of
each facade and are not visible from the public right-of-way. Natural building materials
are preferred, such as clapboard, cedar shake, brick, and stone. Composite boards
manufactured from wood in combination with other products, such as hardboard or fiber
cement board (i.e. HardiPlank) may be used when the board product is less than six (6)
inches wide. Foundation materials may be plain concrete or block when the foundation
material does not extend for more than an average of three (3) feet above the finished
grade level adjacent to the foundation wall. (Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-82

16.162.080
2. Where there is an exterior alteration to an existing building, the exterior finish materials
on the portion of the building being altered or added must visually match the appearance
of those on the existing building. However, if the exterior finishes and materials on the
existing building do not meet the standards of subsection F .1 above, any material that
meets the standards of subsection F .1 may be used.
G. Roof-Mounted Equipment. The purpose of this standard is to minimize the visual impact of
roof-mounted equipment. All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other
communications equipment, must be screened using one of the methods listed below. Solar
heating panels are exempt from this standard.
1. A parapet as tall as the tallest part of the equipment.
2. A screen around the equipment that is as tall as the tallest part of the equipment.
3. The equipment is set back from the street-facing perimeters of the building 3 feet for each
foot of height of the equipment. On comer lots with two street facing areas, all equipment
shall be centered.
(Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
H. Ground Floor Windows. The purpose of this standard is to encourage interesting and active
ground floor uses where activities within buildings have a positive connection to pedestrians in
Old Town. All exterior walls on the ground level which face a street lot line, sidewalk, plaza or
other public open space or right-of-way must meet the following standards:
1. Windows must be at least fifty percent (50%) of the length and twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total ground-level wall area. Ground-level wall areas include all exterior
wall areas up to nine (9) feet above the finished grade. This requirement does not apply to
the walls ofresidential units or to parking structures when set back at least five (5) feet
and landscaped to at least the Section 16.92.030C standard.
2. Required window areas must be either windows that allow views into working areas or
lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. The bottom of the
windows must be no more than four ( 4) feet above the adjacent exterior grade.
I. Distinct Ground Floor. The purpose of this standard is to emphasize the traditional development
pattern in Old Town where the ground floor of buildings is clearly defined. This standard
applies to buildings that have any floor area in non-residential uses. The ground level of the
primary structure must be visually distinct from upper stories. This separation may be provided
by one or more of the following:
1. A cornice above the ground level.
2. An arcade.
3. Changes in material or texture; or
4. A row of clerestory windows on the building's street-facing elevation.
J. Roof. The purpose of this standard is to encourage traditional roof forms consistent with
existing development patterns in Old Town. Roofs should have significant pitch, or if flat, be
designed with a cornice or parapet. Buildings must have either:
1. A sloped roof with a pitch no flatter than 6/12; or
2. A roof with a pitch ofless than 6/12 and a cornice or parapet that meets the following:
470-83 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.080
a. There must be two parts to the cornice or parapet. The top part must project at least six
(6) inches from the face of the building and be at least two (2) inches further from the
face of the building than the bottom part of the cornice or parapet.
b. The height of the cornice or parapet is based on the height of the building as follows:
(1) Buildings sixteen (16) to twenty (20) feet in height must have a cornice or
parapet at least twelve (12) inches high.
(2) Buildings greater than twenty (20) feet and less than thirty (30) feet in height
must have a cornice or parapet at least eighteen ( 18) inches high.
(3) Buildings thirty (30) feet or greater in height must have a cornice or parapet at
least twenty-four (24) inches high.
K. Base of Buildings. Buildings must have a base on all street-facing elevations. The base must be
at least two (2) feet above grade and be distinguished from the rest of the building by a different
color and material. (Ord. 2002-1128 § 3)
L. Height Bonus: A five foot height bonus shall be granted if at least two of the following
amenities are included in the overall design:
1. Awnings or Marquees subject to Section 16.162.090- Commercial Standard.
2. Public art installation subject to Cultural Arts Commission and City Council approval.
3. Additional public bike parking: 1 additional space per residential unit.
4. A courtyard or plaza facing the street open to the public subject to Commission approval.
(Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
16.162.090 OLD TOWN SMOCKVILLE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Old Town Smockville Design Standards is to respect and enhance the
character of Sherwood's original business district and core area while maintaining the city's
traditional, small town, vernacular architectural heritage. The Old Town area has been the
commercial and residential heart of the community since Sherwood's settlement in the late
1800s and it is the intent of the City to retain a strong connection with that history as new
construction, alteration, or additions to existing structures occurs.
Building upon previous studies in the City, the Cultural Resources Inventory (1989), and the
adopted Natural Resources Element of the Comprehensive Plan (1991), the Old Town
Smockville Design Standards are based upon common architectural designs, materials, and
other built characteristics typical of Sherwood's original building forms. Using these historic
models as a template for new construction allows growth and development that respects
Sherwood's history and builds upon our vaunted quality of life. It is not the intent of the design
standards to freeze time and halt progress or restrict an individual property owner's creativity,
but rather to guide proposals and provide a set of parameters for new construction and
remodeling within the Old Town area to assure compatibility with and respect for their historic
surroundings. The Old Town Smockville Design Standards do direct new design toward the
modest architectural character that is traditional in the Old Town area, specifically prohibiting
certain materials and design elements to avoid the introduction of overly grandiose designs at
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-84

16.162.090
variance with our history. However, within those limitations, personal choice can and should be
expressed within the basic framework of the standards.
The Old Town Smockville Design Standards also direct exterior remodeling projects to retain
the modest, traditional character that exists by retaining original architectural elements on
structures within the Old Town Overlay District. To this end, the design standards will provide
the exterior design framework for property owners that want to participate in the Urban
Renewal District's Facade Grant program.
That is, the Standards ensure that any remodeling efforts of existing vintage buildings retain
their modest architectural characteristics by retaining as many original parts as possible. In the
same way that an old car becomes a valuable collector's classic because it retains its original
parts, so it goes with vintage buildings. The building that retains all its original parts, including
windows, doors, chimneys and trim, and keeps them maintained, grows in value for both the
property owner and the community. As an incentive, historic renovations that meet the
applicable local standards are more likely to meet federal and state historic designation
standards and therefore qualify for various city incentive programs.
Under the procedures of the City's Design Review Process established by this Division of this
Code an applicant must demonstrate the proposal meets all of the following design standards in
order for the decision making body to approve the proposal. As such, the standards should help
increase objectivity and reduce subjectivity. As per Chapter 16.160, the Landmarks Advisory
Board, which includes the Planning Commission, is the decision-making authority for
applications under the following Standards. The Landmarks Advisory Board reviews and values
all comments, suggestions, and recommendations prior to approval or denial of any application.
B. Applicability
The following standards are intended as an "overlay" to the underlying Old Town Overlay
zoning district and shall be used as part of the land use approval process when exterior
remodeling and new development is proposed in the "Smockville'' portion of the Old Town
Overlay District. Except in specific situations described herein, these Standards shall apply
equally to all projects within the Smockville portion of the Old Town District. Applicants
seeking variance from these Standards must demonstrate to the review body that compliance
would result in an unnecessary and unavoidable hardship. Variances from the Standards will
not be allowed unless such hardship is adequately demonstrated and proven by the applicant.
The variance process is provided in Chapter 16.84 of the SZCDC. These standards are not
required for the "Old Cannery Area" portion of the Old Town District, but may be used in lieu
of Section 16.162.080. The Old Cannery Area portion is still subject to the design standards in
Section 16.162.080.
C. REMODELING OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
Remodeling Standard 1: Original Elements
Elements that are original to a vintage, traditional or historic structure ( defined in this standard
as primary, secondary, or any structure 50 years or older that is eligible for landmark
designation and professionally surveyed) are an important characteristic. These elements
enhance appeal and retain the overall historic fabric of a neighborhood. In most cases, buildings
with these original parts can and should be restored, first by restoring the original and, if that is
470-85 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
not possible, replacing only those parts that are missing or badly damaged with in-kind
material. With few exceptions, total replacements are unnecessary unless the original materials
were not historically compatible or traditional at the time of construction. The Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation should be consulted in situations not covered by these
standards. Where alterations to an exterior structure are proposed, they shall conform to the
following:
a. Doors: The original door and opening shall be retained, unless beyond local repair. If a
new door must be used the style should match the original whenever possible.
b. Windows: Original windows shall be retained and, if necessary, restored to working
condition. If desired, they can be insulated using the energy conservation methods listed
below. Original glass should be retained whenever possible. If all of the above is not
possible, then the frame shall be retained and a true retrofit sash replacement shall be
installed that matches the glass pattern of the original window.
c. Chimneys: Chimneys made of brick or stone shall be retained, and repaired using proper
masonry techniques and compatible mortar that will not chemically react with the
original masonry and cause further deterioration. If the chimney is no longer in use, the
opening should be covered with a metal or concrete cap. If the chimney is to be used, but
has been determined to be unsound, the chimney masonry should be retained, as above,
and a new flue inserted into the opening.
d. Skylights: Skylights should be placed on the side of the structure not visible from the
public right of way, and should be of a low profile type design.
e. Gutters: Original gutters should be retained, if possible. Half round gutters and round
downspouts are highly desirable, and can be obtained from local manufacturers.
f. Architectural Elements: Window trim, comer board trim, sills, eave decorations, eave
vents, porch posts, and other types of original architectural trim should be retained. If
parts are missing, they should be replicated using the same dimensions and materials as
the original. If only a portion is damaged, the portion itself should be repaired or
replaced, rather than replacing the whole element.
g. Siding: Original siding should be maintained; first repairing damaged sections then, if
that is not possible, replacing damaged or missing sections with in-kind matching
material. In some cases, original siding may have been overlaid during a later historic
period with combed cedar siding, which is a historically appropriate material that may be
retained if desired.
h. Weatherization & Energy Conservation: Modem energy conservation results can be
obtained, by using traditional conservation methods. Attics and floors should be insulated
to conserve heat loss in the winter and insulate against the heat in the summer. Windows
and doors should be caulked around the inside trim, and copper leaf spring type weather
stripping or similar installed to seal leaks. Storm windows ( exterior or interior mounted)
should be put up during the winter months to create insulation. Windows can be further
insulated in winter using insulated-type curtains or honeycomb blinds; in summer,
curtains or blinds reflect heat. Using deciduous trees and plants for additional sun
protection.
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6. 4-07) 470-86

16.162.090
D. Remodeling Standard 2: Front Facing Presentation
Traditionally, the portions of a structure facing the public right of way were considered the
most important for presenting an aesthetically pleasing appearance. Skylights were not used,
and there was very little venting since the structures were not tightly enclosed and wrapped as
they are today. Therefore, keeping all modem looking venting and utilities to the side that is not
visible from the public right of way is important and greatly adds to the appearance.
a. Skylights: Skylights shall be placed on the side of the structure not visible from the
public right-of-way, and shall be of a low profile design.
b. Roof vents: Roof vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material. Where possible, a continuous ridge vent is preferred over roof jacks for
venting purposes. In the case of using a continuous ridge vent with a vintage structure,
care should be taken in creating inconspicuous air returns in the eave of the building.
c. Plumbing vents: Vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material.
E. COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES:
The traditional commercial core area of Sherwood, including those properties in the Smockville
Plat and First Addition Plat, reflect the historic character of the community as a small,
agricultural service area. Buildings here have historically been of modest scale and
construction, consistent with the community's vernacular design heritage. In order to maintain
that basic character in the core the following standards govern all new commercial construction
and remodeling projects requiring a structural building permit.
NOTE: The City encourages applicants to consider mixed-use projects. The following standards
covering commercial structures shall apply for all mixed-use projects in the Old Town
Smockville Area. The massing of a building includes its overall bulk, orientation, and
placement on the site, forming the visual relationship between the building and its surroundings.
Individual aspects of massing, particularly height, are subject to specific Standards below:
Commercial Standard 1: Volume & Mass
a. Orientation: All buildings will be sited with the primary facade facing the public right-of­
way. For comer buildings with a comer-facing entry, both street-facing elevations will be
considered "facades" for purposes of this Standard.
b. Setback: All buildings will be located directly upon the property line with zero setback
from the public right-of-way. Portions of the facade, such as recessed entryways or
similar features, are exempted from this Standard provided they total less than 50% of the
total facade width.
c. Width: Buildings shall extend from side lot line to side lot line to create a solid
streetscape along the public right-of-way. An exception to this standard may be granted
to provide for plazas, courtyards, dining areas, or pedestrian access. [See Standard 5,
below, regarding vertical divisions).
470-87 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
Commercial Standard 2: Openings
To maintain and insure a pedestrian-friendly scale within Sherwood's traditional commercial
core, storefronts and upper facades shall reflect the following:
a. Verticality: All facade window openings shall maintain a generally vertical proportion
(1.5: 1 height/width ratio or greater, i.e. a 24" wide window must be a minimum 36" tall).
An exception to this standard is allowed for large fixed storefront windows. Transom
panels, spanning the entire storefront glazed area, are encouraged.
b. Transparency: Ground floor storefronts should be predominately "transparent," with a
minimum of 75% glazed surface area, including entry doors.
c. Symmetry: Openings should generally reflect the bi-lateral symmetry of the traditional
commercial development pattern. Asymmetrical facades that result from comer or other
non-central entryways, or that result from varied massed forms joined into a single use
are excluded from this Standard.
d. Prohibited Opening Types: To maintain the traditional commercial character of the core
area, the following are prohibited:
1. Sliding or "French" entry door sets on the Facade (such doors are permitted on side
and rear elevations only).
2. Roll-up garage doors (metal or wood), on the Facade (such doors are permitted on side
and rear elevations only). Uses requiring large garage openings on the facade may use
sliding or bi-fold doors, or metal with six over six windows. Wood and glass doors are
encouraged.
3. Reflective glazing, "mirror glass" and similar.
4. Horizontal slider windows (i.e. vertically oriented slider windows).
5. Arched or "fan light" type windows, except where inset into an articulated structural
opening.
Commercial Standard 3: Height
In order to increase opportunities to transit, reduce transportation impacts, and promote
pedestrian activity, multiple story commercial or mixed-use construction is encouraged. All
new commercial and mixed-use construction in the zone is subject to the following standards:
a. Maximum: No building may be greater than 40 feet in overall height.
b. Minimum: No single story building shall have a plate height ofless than 16 feet high at
the public right-of-way.
c. Variation: Building height shall be differentiated a minimum of 6" from the average
height of adjacent buildings to avoid a solid street wall of uniform height. An exception
to this standard will be made for buildings that incorporate a projecting vertical division
in the facade treatment that visually separates the facade from adjacent buildings, such as
a column, pilaster or post.
Commercial Standard 4: Horizontal Facade Rhythm
To maintain the rhythm of Sherwood's traditional architecture, all new commercial construction
shall respect the three-part "base-shaft-capital" facade system common to pre-WWII
commercial designs.
(Sheiwood Supp. No 6, 4-07) 470-88

16.162.090
a. Base: Buildings shall provide a visually articulated foundation or "base" feature, at
ground level, typically rising to the bottom of the sill height. A "base" may be created by
detail or a change in material or form that differentiates the base from the upper portions
of the facade. (i.e. a brick or tiled "base" on a concrete building, or a paneled wood base
on a horizontal sided wood building) This standard may also be met by projecting
elements or change in surface planes that employ a common
b. material, i.e. a projecting brick sill and "apron" on a brick wall or a cast concrete
shoulder that projects away from a concrete wall.
c. Stringcourse: Prominent horizontal lines shall be maintained between all floor levels,
visually dividing the facade into horizontal sections that reflect the interior levels. Such
features may be projecting or incised bands of common materials (as in brick or concrete)
or applied trim, as in a wooden "bellyband."
d. Cornice Details: All buildings shall have a "cap" element at the uppermost portion of the
facade that visually terminates the main facade surface. Cornice details may be integrated
into a stepped or decorative parapet or consist of an articulated line that projects from the
main surface plane. Modest marker blocks stating building name and date of construction
are strongly encouraged.
Com_mercial Standard 5: Vertical Facade Rhythm
Reflecting the narrow underlying land divisions common in Sherwood's downtown and
creating visual interest that enhances the pedestrian scale, commercial facades shall have strong
and clearly articulated vertical elements.
a. Multiple Bays: All storefronts shall be divided into vertical "bays" through the use of
structural members such as columns, pilasters, and posts, or by the use of other surface
detailing that divides large walls into narrower visual panels. No structure shall have a
single "bay" larger than 30 feet, based upon the lot width of the "Original Smockville
Plat" of the Town of Sherwood. Buildings occupying one or more original town lots (i.e.,
greater than 30 feet in width) shall be visually divided into multiple bays of 30' or one­
half the overall lot width, whichever is the lesser. For example, the facade of a 50-foot
wide structure shall be visually divided into two 25' wide bays. An 80' foot structure may
be divided into two 30' bays and one 20' bay or into four 20' bays, either of which will
meet this standard.
b. Edge Definition: All storefronts shall use a pilaster, engaged column, or other structural
or decorative vertical element at each side lot line, to create visual division from the
adjacent structure. (See Standard 3(C), above, regarding the use of projecting elements)
For structures that do not extend from sideline to sideline (as per Standard l(C) above)
the outermost building comer will be treated as the edge for compliance with this
Standard.
Commercial Standard 6: Sense of Entry
All commercial buildings shall have a clearly defined "sense of entry," with the primary public
access serving as a focal point in the visual organization of the facade. This can be
accomplished via structural articulation, such as in a recessed entry, or through the use of trim,
470-89 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
materials, or other elements. A clear and defined sense of entry facilitates retail activity and
adds significantly to the pedestrian interest of the street.
a. Doors: Primary commercial entrances shall be primarily "transparent with no less than
50% of the total surface consisting of glass.
b. Integration: Entryways shall be architecturally integrated into the vertical and horizontal
rhythms of the facade.
c. Depth: Recessed porches shall be no less than three (3) feet in depth.
Commercial Standard 7: Roof Forms
Traditional commercial roof forms, including flat, single-slope, or bowstring and other trussed
roofs, are all typical of downtown Sherwood. Other roof forms, particularly gables, were
screened from the public right-of-way.
a. Gable, hipped or similar residential style roof forms are prohibited for commercial
buildings unless screened from the public right-of-way by a parapet or false front facade.
b. Mansard-type projecting roof elements, other than small, pent elements of 6/12 pitch or
less that are incorporated into a cornice treatment, are prohibited for commercial
buildings in the Old Town Area.
Commercial Standard 8: Exterior Surface Materials
Exterior building materials shall be consistent with those traditionally used in commercial
construction in Old Town Sherwood. These materials include but are not limited to:
■ Horizontal wood siding, painted ( concrete fiber cement siding, or manufactured wood­
based materials are acceptable under this standard provided they present a smooth
finished surface, not "rustic" wood grain pattern)
■ True board and batten vertical wood siding, painted
■ Brick: Traditional use ofred brick laid in common bond is preferred. Rustic, split-faced
or "Roman" brick may be appropriate for bulkheads or detail treatments but is prohibited
as a primary building material. Highly decorative "washed", glazed, or molded brick
forms are prohibited.
■ Stucco (for foundations and decorative panels only)
■ Poured concrete (painted or unpainted)
■ Concrete block: Split faced concrete block is appropriate for foundations, bulkhead, or
detail treatments but is prohibited as a primary building material. Smooth-faced Concrete
Masonry Units (CMU) is prohibited when visible from the public right-of-way.
■ Ceramic tile, as a detail treatment, particularly for use in bulkhead or storefront areas.
Use of the following exterior materials are specifically prohibited within the zone:
Stucco, as a primary wall surface
■ Stucco-clad foam (EIFS) and similar foam-based systems
■ Standing seam metal sheet goods for siding or visible roofing
■ T -111 or similar 4' x 8' sheet materials and plywood
■ Horizontal metal or vinyl siding
■ Metal/Glass curtain wall construction
■ Plastic (vacuum-formed or sheetgoods)
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-90

16.162.090
■ Faux stone ( slumpstone, fake marble, cultured stone) and all similar stone veneer surface
treatments) with the exception of 10% of frontal area is allowed of a brick-type faux
material
■ Shingle siding, log construction, fake "rustic" wood, pecky cedar and similar products
designed to create a "Frontier" era effect.
Commercial Standard 9: Awnings and Marquees
Awnings and marquees projecting from the facade over the public right-of-way are a traditional
commercial element and enhance pedestrian interest and use by providing shelter. Such features
are encouraged but are not required in the zone. Where awnings or marquees are an element in
a proposal they shall conform to the following and are eligible to receive a five foot height
bonus:
a. Scale: Awnings and marquees shall be proportionate in size to the facade and shall not
obscure architectural detail.
b. Placement: Awnings should fit entirely within the window or door openings, retaining the
vertical line of columns and wall surfaces. Storefront awnings may be full width, crossing
interior posts, to a maximum of 25 feet, provided the edge-definition (See Standard 5(B),
above) remains visible.
c. Materials: Awnings
1. Cotton, acrylic canvas, or canvas-like materials are required for use in the zone. The
use of vinyl awnings is specifically prohibited.
2. Fixed metal awnings of corrugated metal are permitted provided the pitch is 5/12 or
less.
3. Wood shingle awnings are permitted provided the pitch is 5/12 or less.
d. Materials: Marquees
1. Natural or painted metal surfaces over an internal structural framework are traditional
marquee design and are preferred.
2. Painted wood marquees are permitted.
3. Plastic panels or any form of internally illuminated marquees are prohibited.
4. Glass or transparent elements that reveal other light sources are prohibited.
e. Shapes: Traditional single-slope awnings are preferred. "Bubble" or rounded shapes are
specifically prohibited except when used with rounded structural openings of the facade
wall such as arch-topped windows.
f. Lighting: Internal awning lighting is prohibited.
g. Signage: Signs or painted graphics are limited to the valance or "edge" of the awning or
marquee only.
h. Height Bonus: In addition to awnings or marquees, the overall design shall include at
least one of the following amenities:
■ Public art installation subject to Cultural Arts Commission and City Council approval.
■ Additional public bike parking: 1 additional space per residential unit.
■ A courtyard or plaza facing the street open to the public subject to Commission
approval.
470-91 (Sherwood Supp. No 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
Commercial Standard 10: Secondary Elevations
By nature, non-street or alley-facing elevations were less detailed than the primary facade. Rear
and sidewall elevation should accordingly be significantly less detailed than storefronts and
built of simple materials.
a. Public Rear Entrance: When a rear or alley entry serves as the primary or secondary
public entrance, modest detail or highlight should create a "sense of entry" as in Standard
6, above. Rear entrances, even when intended as the primary entrance to the use, should
remain essentially functional in character, reinforcing the primacy of the street-facing
elevation.
b. Comer Entrances: When a storefront includes a comer entry, both adjacent facades facing
the public right-of-ways shall be treated as the "facade" for purposes of these Standards.
When a storefront has a visible sidewall elevation as the result of Standard l(C), above,
that elevation shall be treated as a facade in addition to the primary facade.
Commercial Standard 11: Additions to Existing Buildings
Additions to existing commercial buildings in the Old Town Sherwood area are subject to the
same standards as new construction, except as limited by the following:
a. Compatibility: Additions to existing properties that are visible from the public right-of­
way will continue the existing character of the resource or return to the documented
original character in scale, design, and exterior materials. The creation of non­
documented elements outside the traditional vernacular character such as towers, turrets,
elaborate surface decoration and similar "earlying-up" is prohibited. [Earlying-up is
defined as the process of creating a false and more elaborate history than is appropriate
within an area's traditional development pattern. In Sherwood "earlying-up" would
include the use of elaborate architectural styles, materials, or construction forms only
found in San Francisco, Portland, or other larger cities].
b. Attachment: Additions should "read" as such, and be clearly differentiated from the
historic portion of the structure and shall be offset or "stepped" back from the original
volume a minimum of four (4) inches to document the sequence of construction. An
exception to this standard is allowed for the reconstruction of previously existing­
volumes that can be documented through physical or archival evidence.
c. Storefront volumes: Additions that extend the storefront/facade of a structure, even when
creating a joined internal space, shall be treated as a new and separate building facade for
review under these Standards.
d. Non-Compatible Materials: Repair of existing non-compatible materials is exempt from
Standards 1 l(A). Rear-facing additions to existing buildings may continue the use of
these materials so long as they are a continuation of the attached materials.
e. Rear Additions, Excluded: Storage with no physical attachment to the existing volume or
other functional additions of less than 1,000 square feet located to the rear of an existing
volume, and not visible from the public right-of-way are excluded from compliance with
these Standards. Such functional additions shall include covered porches, loading docks,
and similar features provided they are not intended for public use or access.
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-92

16.162.090
Commercial Standard 12: Front-Facing Presentation
Traditionally, the portions of a structure facing the public right of way were considered the
most important for presenting an aesthetically pleasing appearance. Skylights were not used,
and there was very little venting since the structures were not tightly enclosed and wrapped as
they are today. Therefore, keeping all modem looking venting and utilities to the side that is not
visible from the public right of way is important and greatly adds to the appearance.
a. Skylights: Skylights shall be placed on the side of the structure not visible from the
public right of way, and shall be of a low profile design.
b. Roof vents: Roof vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material. Where possible, a continuous ridge vent is preferred over roof jacks for
venting purposes. In the case of using a continuous ridge vent with a vintage structure,
care should be taken in creating inconspicuous air returns in the eave of the building.
c. Plumbing vents: Vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material.
F. RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
Historically, the Old Town District contained both commercial and residential structures, often
intermixed on the same block. Today, many of the city's oldest residential structures remain as
private dwellings while others have been converted to professional office or other commercial
uses. The following standards are intended to reinforce the traditional mixed architectural
character of the district and apply equally to all residential designs, including those now used
for other commercial purposes, such as professional offices, restaurants, antique stores, and
other similar uses. However, the International Building Code still dictates any requirements for
interior remodeling.
Residential Standard 1: Volume & Mass
Historically, residential architecture in the Old Town core was comprised of multiple volumes
or articulations, with extended porches, intersecting roof lines, dormers, and other features
creating a complex whole rather than a single large volume. To maintain that traditional visual
character the following standards apply:
a. Verticality: Buildings shall have a generally vertical character or are comprised of a
primary vertical element surrounded by more horizontally appearing wings.
b. Complexity: Single large volumes are prohibited. Total area shall be contained within a
minimum of two intersecting volumes, one of which may be a porch under a separate
roof element. An attached garage does not constitute a second volume for purposes of
this standard.
c. Height: No building may be greater than 40 feet in overall height. Major roof ridges shall
be no lower than 16 feet in height. [Note: this lower limit is designed to encourage
steeper gables as opposed to low-pitched roof forms]
Residential Standard 2: Roof Forms
Roofs play a significant role in the overall character of a structure and, in combination with
Standard 1, shelter the complex volumes typical of the traditional development pattern.
470-93 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6. 4-07)

16.162.090
a. Pitch: Roof pitches ofless than 6/12 for gables are prohibited. Roof pitches ofless than
5/12 for hipped roofs are prohibited. Flat roofs visible from the street are prohibited. An
exception to this standard may be made for porch roofs attached to the primary volume.
b. Complexity: As per Standard l(B), single large roof forms are prohibited. A single roof
form with two or more dormers is considered a complex roof form and accordingly will
meet this Standard.
c. Materials: Roofs shall be of historically appropriate materials, including asphalt shingle,
wood shingle, or wood shake. The use of metal roofing, concrete tile roofing, hot­
mopped asphalt, rolled asphalt, terra cotta tiles and other non-historic materials are
prohibited in view of the public right-of-way.
Residential Standard 3: Siding/Exterior Cladding
Generally, vertical appearance of historic volumes in Sherwood was typically balanced by
strong horizontal wood siding. The following standard requires a continuation of this horizontal
character. All structures shall employ one or more of the following siding types:
■ Horizontal wood siding, maximum 8" exposed to weather: Concrete or manufactured
wood-based materials are acceptable under this Standard. This includes so-called
"Cottage Siding" of wide panels scored to form multiple horizontal lines. Applicants are
strongly encouraged to use smooth surfaces, not "rustic" or exposed wood grain pattern
materials, which are inconsistent with Sherwood's architecture.
■ Wood Shingle siding (painted shingles are preferred, with a maximum 12" to weather)
■ True board and batten vertical wood siding, painted
• Brick
■ Brick and stone veneer (see below)
Use of the following non-historic exterior materials are specifically prohibited within the zone:
Stucco ( other than as foundation cladding or a secondary detail material, as in a gable end or
enframed panel.).
■ Stucco-clad foam (EIFS, DryVit, and similar)
■ T-111 or similar 4x8 sheet materials or plywood
■ Horizontal metal or vinyl siding
■ Plastic or fiberglass
■ Faux stone (slumpstone, fake marble, cultured stone, and similar)
■ Brick veneer or any other masonry-type material, when applied over wood-frame
construction, of less than twelve (12) inches width in any visible dimension. This
Standard specifically excludes the use of brick or similar veneered "columns" on one face
of an outside comer, as typically used to frame garage openings.
Residential Standard 4: Trim and Architectural Detailing
The vernacular residential architecture of Sherwood reflects the construction techniques of the
late 19th and early 20th century, when buildings had "parts" that allowed for easy construction
in a pre-power saw era. Today, many of these traditional elements are considered ''trim," as
newer materials better shed water and eliminate the original functional aspects of various
historic building elements. This Standard provides for sufficient architectural detail within the
Old Town Area to assure compatibility between new and old construction and create a rich and
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-94

16.162.090
visually interesting streetscape. All residential construction shall employ at least FOUR ( 4) of
the following elements to meet this Standard:
■ Watertable or decorative foundation treatments (including stucco)
■ Comer boards
■ Eave Returns
■ Stringcourse or other horizontal trim at plate or floor levels
■ Eave brackets or support elements
■ Bargeboards/Raking cornice (decorative roof "edge" treatments)
Decorative projecting rafter tails
■ Decorative gable end wall details, including change of materials (shingle bands),
decorative venting, eave compass features and similar
■ Wide cornice-level frieze and wall treatments.
Residential Standard 5: Openings [Windows & Doors]
Doors and windows form the "eyes" and "mouth" of a building and play a significant role in
forming its character.
Windows
a. Verticality: All windows will reflect a basic vertical orientation with a width-to-height
ratio of 1.5 to 2, or greater (i.e., a 24" wide window must be a minimum 36" tall). Larger
window openings shall be formed by combining multiple window sash into groupings.
b. Types: The following windows types are permitted:
1. Single and double hung windows.
2. Hopper and transom-type windows.
3. Casement windows.
4. Any combination of the above, including groupings containing a central single pane
fixed window flanked by two or more operable windows.
5. Glass block windows.
6. Fixed leaded or stained glass panels.
The following window types are specifically prohibited within the area:
1. Fixed pane windows (when not within a grouping, as in #4, above).
2. Horizontal slider windows (when visible from the public right-of-way).
3. Arched windows and fanlights, including "Palladian" window groupings, are inconsistent
with the vernacular character of the area and are prohibited when visible from the public­
right-of-way.
c. Lights: (internal divisions of window, formed by "muntins" or "mullions") True­
divided lights are preferred. "Pop-In" or fake muntins are not historic, nor appropriate
within Sherwood's vernacular tradition, and are prohibited when visible from the
public right-of-way.
d. Sash Materials: Wood windows or enameled metal clad windows are most consistent
with the vernacular tradition and are preferred. Vinyl windows or paintable fiberglass
windows are allowed. Anodized or mill-finish aluminum windows or storm windows
are prohibited.
470-95 (Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
Doors
e. Mirror Glazing: The use of"mirror" or reflective glass visible from the public right-of­
way is prohibited.
a. Transparency: Primary entry doors will retain a degree of transparency, with no less than
25% of the surface being glazed, either in clear, leaded, or stained glass materials. Solid,
flat single, panel doors are prohibited.
b. Materials: Doors may be of wood, metal-clad wood, or metal. Other materials that can be
painted or stained, such as cast fiberglass, so as to reflect traditional materials are
permitted.
Trim
a. Sills: All windows will have a projecting sill and apron.
b. Side and Head Casing: Door and window trim will including side and head casing that
sits no less than 1/2" proud of the surrounding wall surface. Trim mounted in plane with
siding is not permitted in the Old Town area. Trim mounted atop siding is not
recommended.
c. Other Trim Elements: As discussed in Standard 4, above, the use of trim to articulate the
construction process was a standard character-defining element of Sherwood's vernacular
architecture. Although not required by this Standard, the use of the following traditional
door and window trim elements are encouraged, particularly on the primary facade.
■ Simple window "hoods," mounted over the window opening. Such features are
traditionally treated as pents and clad with roofing material
■ Parting bead, between the side and head casings
■ Crown moldings
■ Decorative comer elements at the head, apron, or both
■ Single or dual flanking sidelights at entryways
■ Transom windows above the major door or window openings
Residential Standard 6: Porches/Entrances
In combination with doors, front porches help create a "sense of entry" and typically serve as
the focal point of the front-facing facade of the structure. Porches should be encouraged and
adequately detailed to create that sense of entry and serve as a primary element of the exterior
character.
a. Depth: Projecting or recessed porches should be a minimum of five (5) feet deep.
Projecting covered stoops should be a minimum of three (3) feet deep.
b. Width: Projecting or recessed porches should be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide or 25%
of the primary facade width, which ever is the lesser. Projecting covered stoops should be
a minimum of five ( 5) feet wide.
c. Supports: To assure appropriate visual weight for the design, vertical porch supports shall
have a "base" of no less than six ( 6) inches square in finished dimension from floor level
to a minimum 32" height. Upper posts shall be no less than four ( 4) inches square.
1. Base features may be of boxed wood, brick, stone, true stucco, or other materials that
reflect a support structure. The use of projecting "caps" or sills is encouraged at the
transition between the base and column.
(Sherwood Supp No. 6, 4-07) 470-96

16.162.090
2. When the entire support post is a minimum of six ( 6) inches square no base feature is
required.
3. Projecting covered stoops, with no full-height vertical support, shall utilize members
of no less than four ( 4) inches square.
Residential Standard 7: Landscape, Fencing, and Perimeter Definition
Fencing or other edge-defining perimeter features, including the use oflandscape materials, are
traditional elements in Old Town Sherwood's residential areas. Please refer to Chapter 16.92 of
the SZCDC for applicable landscaping standards and requirements. In addition to those
provisions, such features within the Smockville Area shall also comply with the following
Standard to maintain the area's character.
a. Materials: The following fencing materials are permitted in the Smockville Area:
1. Brick.
2. Concrete, including concrete block, "split faced" concrete block and similar.
3. Stone.
4. Wood, including vertical or horizontal board, pickets, split rail, and similar traditional
fence designs.
5. Woven-metal (arch-top wire), construction cloth (square-patterned) and similar.
1. Vinyl, when used in simple plain board, picket, or post and board installations.
(see #3, below)
2. Natural metal colored or black-coated chain link fencing is permitted, but
discouraged when visible from the public-right-of-way.
3. The mixed use of materials, as in brick columns with wood or woven wire
"fields" is encouraged.
b. The following fencing materials are prohibited in the Smockville area:
1. Plywood or other solid wood panel systems.
2. Open pattern concrete elements except as decorative elements.
3. Vinyl, that includes the use of arches, latticework, finials, acorn tops, and other
elaborate detailing not consistent with Old Town Sherwood's vernacular tradition.
4. Vinyl or wood slat inserts in chain link fencing when in view from the public right-of­
way.
5. Faux stone, including cultured stone, slumpstone, and similar materials.
6. Molded or cast aluminum.
a. Transparency: Solid barriers of any material built to the maximum allowable
height are prohibited facing the public right of way(s). Pickets or wood slats
should provide a minimum 1/2" spacing between vertical elements with large
spacing encouraged. Base elements, as in a concrete "curb" or foundation
element are excluded from this standard provided they are no higher than twelve
(12) inches above grade.
b. Gates/Entry Features: In order to create a sense of entry, gates, arbors, pergolas,
or similar elements integrated into a perimeter fence are strongly encouraged.
Such features may exceed the maximum fence height limit of four ( 4) feet
provided they are less than eight (8) feet in overall height, are located more than
470-97 (Sherwood Supp No 6, 4-07)

16.162.090
ten ( 10) feet from any public intersection, and do not otherwise reduce pedestrian
or vehicular safety.
Residential Standard 8: Additions to Existing Buildings
a. Compatibility: Additions to existing properties will continue the existing character of the
resource or return to the documented original character in scale, design, and exterior
materials. The creation of non-documented elements outside the traditional vernacular
character such as towers, turrets, elaborate surface decoration and similar "ear lying-up" is
prohibited.
b. Attachment: Additions should "read" as such, and be clearly differentiated from the
historic portion of the structure and shall be offset or "stepped" back from the original
volume a minimum of four (4) inches to document the sequence of construction. An
exception to this standard is allowed for the reconstruction of previously existing
volumes that can be documented through physical or archival evidence.
c. Non-Compatible Materials: Repair of existing non-compatible materials is exempt from
Standard 8(A). Rear-facing additions to existing buildings may continue the use of these
materials so long as they are a continuation of the attached materials.
Residential Standard 9: Front-Facing Presentation
Traditionally, the portions of a structure facing the public right of way were considered the
most important for presenting an aesthetically pleasing appearance. Skylights were not used,
and there was very little venting since the structures were not tightly enclosed and wrapped as
they are today. Therefore, keeping all modem looking venting and utilities to the side that is not
visible from the public right of way is important and greatly adds to the appearance.
a. Skylights: Skylights shall be placed on the side of the structure not visible from the
public right of way, and shall be of a low profile design.
b. Roof vents: Roof vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material. Where possible, a continuous ridge vent is preferred over roof jacks for
venting purposes. In the case of using a continuous ridge vent with a vintage structure,
care should be taken in creating inconspicuous air returns in the eave of the building.
c. Plumbing vents: Vents should, wherever possible, be placed on the side of the structure
least visible from the public right of way, and painted to blend with the color of the
roofing material.
16.162.100 Architectural Guidelines.
The Old Town Design Guidelines were developed to assist applicants during the architectural
design, development and review process with illustrative examples of recommended designs. The
guidelines are a user-friendly compendium of recommended designs that reference applicable
sections of Chapter 16.162, and are hereby adopted and effective hereafter as amended. For any
architectural definitions not listed in Chapter 16.10, A Visual Dictionary of Architecture (Francis DK
Ching -1997) shall be used as a reference.
(Ord. 2006-009 § 2)
(Sherwood Supp. No. 6, 4-07) 470-98

Sections:
16.164.010 GENERALLY
Chapter 16.164
