16.10.030 General requirements.

A. Should the owner or occupant of a structure change the use to which the building is put, thereby increasing parking or loading requirements, the increased parking/loading area shall be provided prior to commencement of the new use.

B. Parking and loading requirements for structures not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the City Planner, based upon requirements of comparable uses listed.

C. In the event several uses occupy a single structure, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately. If the applicant can demonstrate that the uses do not have overlapping parking needs (based on days and hours of operation) and can share parking, the total requirement for combined uses may be reduced by up to 60 percent.

D. Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot, or adjacent lot, with the dwelling. Parking spaces located within an on-site garage shall count toward the minimum parking requirement for residential uses. Other required parking spaces may be located on a separate parcel, provided the parcel is not greater than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the building to be served, measured along the shortest pedestrian route to the building. The applicant must prove that the parking located on another parcel is functionally located and that there is safe vehicular and pedestrian access to and from the site.

E. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business.

F. Institution of on-street parking shall not be allowed for off-street parking, where none is previously provided, and shall not be done solely for the purpose of relieving crowded parking lots in commercial or industrial planning districts.

G. Parking facilities may be shared by users on adjacent parcels if all of the following standards are met, or the Planning Commission determines a lesser combination meets the intent of the ordinance:

1. One of the parcels has excess parking spaces, considering the present use of the property; and the other parcel lacks sufficient area for required parking spaces. Excess parking spaces can be determined by considering when the uses need the parking spaces, such as time of day or day of week.

2. The total number of parking spaces meets the standards for the sum of the number of spaces that would be separately required for each use. If the applicant can demonstrate that the uses do not have overlapping parking needs (based on days and hours of operation) and can share parking, the total requirement for combined uses may be reduced by up to 60 percent.

3. Legal documentation, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, shall be submitted verifying present use of the excess parking area on one lot by patrons of the uses deficient in required parking areas.

4. Physical access between adjoining lots shall be such that functional and reasonable access is provided to uses on the parcel deficient in parking spaces.

5. Adequate directional signs shall be installed specifying the joint parking arrangement.

H. The number of vehicular spaces required in Table 16.10.050 may be reduced by up to 10% if one of the following is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Director or Planning Commission:

1. Residential densities greater than nine units per gross acre (limit parking to no less than one space per unit for multi-family structures); or

2. The proposed development is pedestrian-oriented by virtue of a location which is within convenient walking distance of existing or planned neighborhood activities (such as schools, parks, shopping, etc.) and the development provides additional pedestrian amenities not required by the code which, when taken together, significantly contribute to making walking convenient (e.g., wider sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, pedestrian scale lighting, benches, etc.). (Ord. 890 section 10, 1993; Ord. 854 section 2 [part], 1991; Ord. 848, Part V, section 16.10.030, 1990; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord. 1338, 2010)
