16.64.030 Easements.

A. Utility Lines. Easements for electric lines or other public utilities are required, subject to the recommendations of the utility providing agency. Utility easements twelve feet in width shall be required along all street lot lines unless specifically waived. The commission may also require utility easements along side or rear lot lines when required for utility provision. The construction of buildings or other improvements on such easements shall not be permitted unless specifically allowed by the affected utility providing agency.

B. Watercourses. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the purpose of assuring adequate flood control. Streets parallel to watercourses may be required.

C. Pedestrian Ways. In any block over six hundred feet in length, a pedestrian way or combination pedestrian way and utility easement shall be provided through the middle of the block. If unusual conditions require blocks longer than one thousand two hundred feet, two pedestrian ways may be required. When essential for public convenience, such ways may be required to connect to cul-de-sacs, or between streets and other public or semipublic lands or through green way systems. Sidewalks to city standards may be required in easements where insufficient right-of-way exists for the full street surface and the sidewalk. All pedestrian ways shall address the following standards to provide for the safety of users:

1. Length should be kept to a minimum and normally not in excess of two hundred feet;

2. Width should be maximized and shall not be below ten feet. For pathways over one hundred feet long, pathway width shall increase above the minimum by one foot for every twenty feet of length;

3. A minimum of three foot-candles illumination shall be provided. Lighting shall minimize glare on adjacent uses consistent with the outdoor lighting provisions in section 16.43 of this code;

4. Landscaping, grade differences, and other obstructions should not hinder visibility into the pedestrian way from adjacent streets and properties. Fencing along public pedestrian ways shall conform wih the standards in Section 16.08.110;

5. Surrounding land uses should be designed to provide surveillance opportunities from those uses into the pedestrian way, such as with the placement of windows;

6. Exits shall be designed to maximize safety of users and traffic on adjacent streets; and

7. Use of permeable surfacing materials for pedestrian ways and sidewalks is encouraged whenever site and soil conditions make permeable surfacing feasible. Permeable surfacing includes, but is not limited to: paving blocks, turf block, pervious concrete, and porous asphalt. All permeable surfacing shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards and the manufacturer’s recommendations. Maintenance of permeable surfacing materials located on private property are the responsibility of the property owner.

D. Developments that abut the Molalla Forest Road multi-use path shall provide a pedestrian/bicycle access to the path. The city may determine the development to be exempt from this standard if there is an existing or planned access to the path within 300 feet of the development.

E. Solar Easements. Subdividers shall be encouraged to establish solar easements and utilize appropriate solar design in their development proposals. Solar easements shall be shown on the final plat and in the deed restrictions of the subdivision. The Planning Commission may require the recordation of special easements or other documents intended to protect solar access. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(3), 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1340, 2011)
