16.64.040 Lots.

A. Size and Shape. The lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. To provide for proper site design and prevent the creation of irregularly shaped parcels, the depth of any lot or parcel shall not exceed three times its width (or four times its width in rural areas) unless there is a topographical or environmental constraint or an existing man-made feature such as a railroad line.

B. Minimum Lot Sizes:

1. Lot sizes shall conform with requirements of Division III unless the applicant chooses to use an alternative lot layout per subsection (3) below to accommodate interconnected and continuous open space and or other natural resources. In this case, the average minimum lot size may be reduced by 5,000 square feet after subtracting access tracts. Overall development densities shall comply with the underlying maximum density allowed by the zone.

2. In areas that cannot be connected to sewer trunk lines, minimum lot sizes shall be greater than the minimum herein specified if necessary because of adverse soil structure for sewage disposal by septic systems. Such lot sizes shall conform to the requirements of Clackamas County for sewage disposal unless provisions are made for sanitary sewers.

3. Alternative lot layout. Applicants may deviate from standard lot setbacks and dimensions to accommodate dedicated interconnected open space or other natural areas. Clustered housing, lot-size averaging, and a mixture of approaches where building lots can be grouped into a smaller portion of the total development, reserving the remainder for open space or other natural areas. Alternative development layouts shall not exceed the underlying maximum density allowed by the zone.

4. When using the alternative lot layout option, the following must be met:

a. The arrangement of the alternative lot layout shall be designed to avoid development forms commonly known as linear, straight-line or highway strip patterns.

b. To the maximum extent possible, open space and natural areas, where used, shall be continuous, interconnected, and concentrated in large usable areas.

c. Where possible, open space shall be connected to adjacent off-site open space areas.

d. Open space and natural areas shall be maintained permanently by the property owner or the property owner’s association.

C. Lot Frontage. All lots shall meet the requirements specified in Division III for frontage on a public street, except that the Planning Commission may allow the creation of flag lots, cul-de-sac lots and other such unique designs upon findings that access and building areas are adequate. Lots that front on more than one major street shall be required to locate motor vehicle accesses on the street with the lower functional classification.

D. Double Frontage. Double frontage or through lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.

E. Lot Side Lines. The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to the street upon which the lots face, or on curved streets they shall be radial to the curve, unless there is some recognizable advantage to a different design.

F. Resubdivision. In subdividing tracts into large lots which at some future time are likely to be resubdivided, the location of lot lines and other details of the layout shall be such that resubdivision may readily take place without violating the requirements of these regulations and without interfering with the orderly development of streets. Restriction of building locations in relationship to future street rights-of-way shall be made a matter of record if the commission considers it necessary.

G. Building Lines. If special building setback lines are to be established in the subdivision plat, they shall be shown on the subdivision plat or included in the deed restrictions. This includes lots where common wall construction is to be permitted between two single-family dwellings.

H. Potentially Hazardous Lots or Parcels. The commission shall utilize its prerogative to modify or deny a tentative plat or partition map where it is found that a proposed lot or parcel is potentially hazardous due to flooding or soil instability.

I. Flag Lots or Panhandle-shaped Lots. The commission may allow the creation of flag lots provided that the following standards are met:

1. Not more than one flag lot shall be created to the rear of any conventional lot and having frontage on the same street unless it is found that access will be adequate and that multiple flag lots are the only reasonable method to allow for development of the site. Every flag lot shall have access to a public street.

2. The access strip is to be a minimum of twenty feet in width and shall be paved for its full width from its connection with the public street to the main body of the lot. Except, however, that the width requirement may be reduced to twelve feet, for accessing a single flag lot, where the total length of the access strip does not exceed one hundred feet. Access strips not less than ten feet in width may be permitted where two such drives abut and are provided with reciprocal easements for use. For drives accessing more than two flag lots, the access strip shall be a minimum of twenty feet with reciprocal access and maintenance agreements for all lots.

3. For residential flag lots, a minimum building setback of five feet from the access strip shall be maintained where such buildings exist prior to the creation of the flag lot.

4. Design and locations of buildings on flag lots shall be such that normal traffic will have sufficient area to turn around, rather than necessitating backing motions down the access strip. The commission may establish special setback requirements at the time of approving the creation of flag lots.

5. Flag lots shall not be permitted when the result would be to increase the number of properties requiring direct and individual access connections to the State Highway System or other arterials.

6. The area of a panhandle shaped or flag lot shall be considered to be the rear or buildable portion of the lot and shall not include the driveway or access strip.

7. For the purposes of defining setbacks, flag lots shall have three side yards and one yard of 20 feet generally on the garage access side of the dwelling.

J. Designation of Lots as ‘Infill Home’ Sites. The Planning Commission may require that homes built on one or more lots adjacent to existing development be subject to any or all of the requirements of 16.21.050 - Infill Homes. Furthermore, for subdivisions where the parent parcel(s) is less than two acres in size, the Planning Commission may require that all homes built on lots in the subdivision be subject to any or all of the requirements of 16.21.050. These requirements are to be shown on the subdivision plat or included in the deed restrictions. (Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(F) and 10.4.40(C)(4), 1984; Ord. 890 section 54, 1993; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord. 1107, 2002; Ord. 1111 section 6, 2003; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
