16.21.050 Infill Homes

A. Purpose. The purposes of these standards are to promote compatibility between new development and existing homes, and, to provide for the efficient use of residential land.

B. Applicability. These standards apply to all new infill homes as defined by 16.04.255. The standards also apply to remodels of existing infill homes where the remodel increases the homes floor area by more than 50%, not including garage area.

C. Standards for Infill Homes (see figure 16.21-6)

1. Lot Coverage - Infill homes exceeding one story shall not exceed a lot coverage of 35%. In this standard, lot coverage applies to portion of the lot covered by structures, not including garage area.

2. Garage Standards - Infill homes must meet the Option 1 garage standards in 16.21.030. The infill home is exempt from garage standards if located on a flag lot, or, if an adjacent home fronting the same street does not comply with the garage standards in 16.21.030(C).

3. Similar Front Setback - Infill homes shall establish a front yard setback that is within 5 feet of the front yard setback for the closest adjacent home on the same side of the street. This standard does not apply if the closest adjacent home has a front yard setback greater than 30 feet.

4. Maximum Height. Infill homes shall have a maximum height of 28 feet.

5. Step-up Standard. At the interior and rear setback line, the infill home shall not exceed a single story exterior wall height (not to exceed 10 feet from finished floor to top plate). The area within a gable is not included in the wall height. Finished vaulted ceilings or unfinished attic spaces without exterior windows are allowed in the gable area. The building may increase in height by one foot vertically for every foot horizontally away from the setback line, up to the maximum height allowed. Building height is measured as defined by the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The Planning Director or Planning Commission may exempt infill homes from this standard for any yard that abuts a property on which the existing home is greater than one story.
