16.76.010 Minimum requirements.

The minimum requirements for a residential planned unit development shall include the following two items:

A. Open Space. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross area of the development shall be devoted to open space and shall be located in a common area or dedicated to the public, except in the case of conversions of existing rentals to unit ownership, where the Planning Commission may permit a lesser requirement if it is found that adequate recreation facilities exist for the units.

1. Usable Open Space. Open space areas shall be planned and improved to provide opportunities for active recreation, passive relaxation, or community interaction, and which are accessible to the general public or to residents, employees or customers in common. Examples include plazas, courtyards, private parks, sport fields and courts, and viewpoints overlooking natural resource areas.

a. The following shall not be counted towards a planned unit development’s usable open space:

i. Areas of land where the average slope exceeds 20 percent where there is no associated usable amenity provided;

ii. Areas subject to the Wetland Overlay Zone (WO) per section 16.39 or the Hazard Overlay Zone (H) per section 16.40 unless the area can be improved to include usable amenities in conformance with the provisions of these overlay zones;

iii. Fenced surface stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities may only be counted as usable open space if they are not fenced, include associated passive recreational amenities such as benches, viewpoints, or walking paths and are effectively incorporated into the development’s overall open space design; and

iv. Other areas determined by the review authority to be unusable for the purpose of meeting this standard.

2. Exemption. Portions of the planned unit development site used for cottage clusters do not count toward the development site’s gross area for the purpose of calculating the minimum usable open space requirement for PUDs per this standard. However, common courtyards provided with cottage cluster developments per section 16.21.080(F)(2) as a part of aPUD may count towards a PUD’s usable space requirement.

B. Density. The planned unit development site shall adhere to the minimum and maximum density provisions of the base zone, except where a density bonus is approved as provided in subsection B(1) below. The average area per dwelling unit shall not be less than that allowed within the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, unless alternative lot layout is used pursuant to 16.64.040(B). The average area shall be calculated by dividing the number of dwelling units into the gross area of the total land development, minus that area occupied by streets. The commission may grant a density bonus of not more than fifteen percent to planned unit developments where it is found that unique, beneficial design features (such as solar efficiency, recreation facilities, or other community assets) warrant such abonus. The commission shall clearly state its findings in support of granting or denying a requested density bonus.

1. Density Bonus. The planning commission may grant an increase of up to 20% beyond the maximum density of the underlying base zone if all of the following criteria are met:

a. Existing and proposed streets within and connecting to the development site will support the proposed density;

b. Existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems within and connecting to the development will support the proposed density;

c. The development demonstrates innovative site design, outstanding architectural variety, and quality construction which will mitigate the increased density;

d. The increased density will be mitigated by providing exceptional CITY OF CANBY quality and increased quantity of usable open space beyond the minimum amount required by section 16.76.010(A), and other amenities, especially active recreational areas.

e. A minimum of five (5) percent of the planned unit development’s dwelling units must be single-story units that have at least one (1) entrance accessible via a route that does not have any stairs between it and the street lot line or an on-site parking space.

2. Exceptions.

a. Cottage cluster units provided within a planned unit development do not count toward the maximum density standard of the underlying base zone. Cottage cluster developments proposed within a planned unit development must meet the applicable development and design standards for cottage cluster developments per section 16.21.080.

C. The density allowed in each base zone may be spread throughout the planned unit development site.

D. To achieve the goals of low impact development, buildings are encouraged to be clustered within the designated development area of the site. Clustering is intended to preserve open space, reduce total impervious surface area, and minimize development impacts on critical areas and associated buffers. Preservation of open space reduces potential stormwater runoff and associated impacts and provides area for dispersion, filtration and infiltration of stormwater. The arrangement of clustered buildings shall be designed to avoid development forms commonly known as linear, straight-line or highway strip patterns.

E. The use of LID best management practices in site design and development is required where site and soil conditions make it feasible option. LID practices shall meet the standards set forth in the Canby Public Works design Standards.

Ord. 740 section 10.5.50, 1984; Ord. 890 section 57, 1993; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019; Ord 1634, 2024)
