16.13.010 North Redwood Plan District

A. Purpose

The North Redwood Plan District implements the North Redwood Development Concept Plan (NRDCP) and is intended to ensure that development within the North Redwood area is consistent with the land use pattern and transportation network established by the NRDCP. The North Redwood Plan District is also intended to provide some flexibility for new development in order to protect natural resources and emphasize the Willow Creek corridor as a community amenity.

B. Applicability

The standards and regulations in this chapter apply to all land within the North Redwood Plan District as shown on the City of Canby’s North Redwood Plan District Map.

The provisions in this chapter apply in addition to standards and regulations established in the base zone and other applicable sections of the Canby Zoning Code. Where standards in this chapter conflict with standards in other sections of the Canby Zoning Code, this section will supersede.

C. Approval criteria

The following criteria must be satisfied prior to approval of any new subdivision or Planned Unit Development within the North Redwood Plan District as they apply to the area proposed for development.

1. Generally, new road alignments should be consistent with those identified on Figure 9 of the DCP. Changes to the identified road alignments may be approved to allow for topographic or other conditions.

2. There shall be a minimum of five connections to existing roads on the east side of North Redwood Street, built to the City’s Local Street standard. To the extent possible, additional connections should not create offset intersections and should meet spacing standards in the Transportation System Plan.

3. A cul-de-sac shall only be allowed when environmental or topographical constraints, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation. The map in Figure 9 of the DCP identifies three locations where cul-de-sacs could be allowed.

4. One loop road shall be built through the North Redwood community, connecting NE 18th Place to NE 12th Avenue. The loop road shall be built to the City’s Neighborhood Route standards. Where possible, the loop road should travel adjacent to Willow Creek and provide access to Willow Creek trailheads and open space.

5. Where possible, other local streets in North Redwood should intersect with the loop road identified in (3) above.

6. At least one additional local street shall traverse the study area from north to south, connecting the area zoned for low density residential with the area zoned for high density residential.

7. Future local streets should be located to split parcel lines where feasible.

8. The land east of Willow Creek shall be accessed from an extension of North Teakwood Street and terminate in a cul-de-sac, hammerhead, or other appropriate turnaround.

9. Block size shall be consistent with the following:

i. Block widths should be approximately 280 feet whenever possible. Alternate block widths may be approved to allow for topographical variations

ii. Overall block length shall not exceed 600 feet

iii. A bicycle/pedestrian connection shall be provided at least every 330 feet, consistent with provisions in the Canby Transportation System Plan (TSP)

10. The park and open space corridor along Willow Creek, as identified in Figure 7 of the DCP, shall be provided through required land dedication for parks.

11. Applicants must demonstrate that future adjacent projects will be able to connect to proposed roads and other infrastructure in a way that will be consistent with the North Redwood DCP.

D. Lot area exceptions and lot size averaging.

The following exceptions to the City’s lot size standards and lot size averaging provisions will be allowed for developments in the North Redwood Plan District.

1. The Planning Commission may allow public park land dedications to be included in the lot size averaging calculation in order to achieve community development goals and allow protection of natural resources.

2. The resulting average lot size shall not be less than 5,000 square feet in the R1 zone.

3. The resulting average lot size shall not be less than 4,000 square feet in the R1.5 zone.

4. Individual lot sizes may be less than prescribed in Sections 16.16.030 and 16.18.030 alternative lot layout option provided in Section 16.64.040 is used. (Ord. 1422, 2015)
