16.22.010 Uses permitted outright.

Uses permitted outright in the C-1 zone shall be as follows:

A. Residential. Residential uses shall be permitted only when part of a mixed use development (residential with commercial, office, or public/institutional use). Both vertical mixed use (housing above the ground floor) and horizontal mixed use (housing on the ground floor) developments are allowed, as follows:

1. Ground floor dwelling units that are incidental (less than 25% of the ground floor gross area) attached to any use allowed in a C-1 zone, and have access from a side or back entrance, or an entrance that is incidental to the commercial main ground floor use.

2. Residential units occupying the second and/or third story of any structure in the C-1 zone, provided the primary ground floor use is listed in 16.22.010.

3. Limitation on street-level housing. No more than fifty (50) percent of a single street frontage may be occupied by residential uses. This standard is intended to reserve storefront space for commercial uses and public/institutional uses; it does not limit residential uses above the street level on upper stories, or behind street-level storefronts. For parcels with street access at more than one level (e.g., sloping sites with two street frontages), the limitation on residential building space shall apply to all street frontages.

a. Density. There is no minimum or maximum residential density standard. Density shall be controlled by the applicable lot coverage and building height standards.

b. Parking, garages, and driveways. All off-street vehicle parking intended for residential use, including surface lots and garages, shall be oriented to alleys, placed underground, placed in structures above the ground floor, or located in parking areas behind or to the side of the building; except that side yards facing a street (i.e., corner yards) shall not be used for surface parking. All garage entrances facing a street (e.g., underground or structured parking) shall be recessed behind the front building elevation by a minimum of four (4) feet. On corner lots, garage entrances shall be oriented to a side street when access cannot be provided from an alley.

c. Creation of alleys. When a residential subdivision (e.g., four or more townhome lots) is proposed, a public alley shall be created for the purpose of vehicle access. Alleys are not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable. As part of a subdivision, the City may require dedication of right-of-way or easements, and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) to provide pedestrian connections through a development site.

4. Existing dwelling units which are not incidental and attached to a use allowed in the C-1 zone may be altered, expanded (or rebuilt within one year of a fire or other act of nature) provided that any such additions or rebuilding comply with the development standards for dwelling units in the R-2 zone;

B. Retail store or shop, except those listed as permitted or conditional uses in the C-2 zone;

C. Amusement enterprise, including pool hall, bowling alley, dance hall, skating rink or theater, when enclosed in a building;

D. Bakery, for retail sale primarily on premises; Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of bakery products. The products may be purchased from others or made on the premises. Provided the manufacturing does not exceed 7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5461

E. Barber or beauty shop, nail salon;

F. Bank or other financial institution;

G. Bed and Breakfast, in an existing residence;

H. Bicycle sales, service, or repair;

I. Blueprinting, Photostatting, printing or other reproduction process;

J. Bus depot;

K. Business college;

L. Catering establishment;

M. Church or places of worship;

N. Club or lodge hall;

O. Day care facility;

P. Laundry or cleaning establishment;

Q. Frozen food lockers;

R. Hardware store, not including lumber or other large building materials requiring on-site outside or warehouse storage;

S. Hotel and apartment hotel;

T. Laboratory for experimental, photo or electronic testing research;

U. Locksmith or gunsmith;

V. Magazine or newspaper distribution agency;

W. Mortuary (including those used for pets);

X. Office, business or professional;

Y. Pawn shop;

Z. Public Transit Center;

AA. Restaurant, without drive-in service;

BB. Scientific or professional instrument sales or repair;

CC. Sales, rental or repair of small recreational, radio, television, business or household equipment;

DD. Studio, including music, art, dancing, photography or health;

EE. Taxidermy shop;

FF. Telephone or telegraph exchange;

GG. Theater, except drive-in;

HH. Auto parts store and incidental shop facilities;

II. Upholstery shop;

JJ. Watch and clock repair;

KK. Similar commercial uses as determined by the Planning Commission;

LL. Public building or land use such as fire station, city hall, park, playground, library or museum.

MM. Minor public facility.

NN. Drinking Places (alcoholic Beverages) Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor, for consumption on the premises. The sale of food frequently accounts for a substantial portion of the receipts of these establishments. SIC 5813

OO. Brew Pub: General Manufacturing of products included in SIC 2082: Malt Beverages, provided the manufacturing does not exceed 7,000 square feet of total floor area per development site, and retail sales of the products manufactured is provided on-site, and the sale of food frequently accounts for a substantial portion of the receipts of the establishment.

PP. Confectionary Store: Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing confectionery for direct sale on the premises to household consumers provided the manufacturing does not exceed 7000 square feet of floor space. SIC 5441 (Ord. 890 section 24, 1993; Ord. 805 section 2, 1987; Ord. 802 section 6, 1987; Ord. 740 section 10.3.24(A), 1984; Ord. 955 section 8, 1996; Ord. 981 section 21, 1997; Ord. 1076, 2001; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019)

QQ. Collocations: Pursuant to the standards and requirements of Chapter 16.55. (Ord. 1539, 2020)

RR. Food Cart Pods: Pursuant to the standards and requirements of Chapter 16.45. (Ord. 1570, 2022)
