16.76.030 Standards and criteria.

Additional to the standards and criteria listed in Divisions III and IV which are applicable to planned unit development, the following standards and criteria shall apply:

A. The site approval as acted upon by the commission shall be binding upon the developer, and variations from the plan shall be subject to approval by the commission.

B. All land within the planned unit development may be subject to contractual agreements with the city and to recorded covenants providing for compliance with the city's requirements.

C. The development of the property in the manner proposed will be in keeping with the requirements of this title, other than those provisions allowing for special treatment of PUD's.

D. The plan for the proposed development shall present a unified and organized arrangement of buildings and service facilities.

E. The development must be designed so that the land areas and buildings around the perimeter of the project do not conflict with the adjoining properties. Where the development is adjacent to lower intensity uses, higher intensity uses should be placed within the interior of the project. The commission may establish special conditions for the perimeter of the development to minimize or mitigate potential conflicts.

F. Each planned unit development shall be a complete development considering all previous requirements. The commission may, in addition, require the inclusion of facilities such as special curbs, sidewalks, streetlights, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, underground power and telephone lines, landscaping and adequate easements for utilities.

G. Land which is not intended for physical development, such as buildings or street uses, may be required to remain in open space usage perpetually. Maintenance of such open space areas shall remain the responsibility of the individual owner or owners' association, in a manner outlined in the by-laws of such association.

H. The manner in which any open space or park and recreational area is to be maintained shall be submitted, along with the preliminary copy of the proposed owners' association bylaws and contractual agreements, with the preliminary subdivision. In the case of an individual owner, the commission may impose special requirements to assure long-term maintenance.

I. The Planning Commission may, and in the case of single story or townhouse structures shall, require the separation of utilities from one unit to the next.

J. In reviewing an application for the conversion of existing residential units to condominiums, the commission shall utilize the general standards as are applied to the new construction of planned unit developments. A proposed conversion which is not found to meet the standards customarily applied to planned unit developments will not be approved.

K. In reviewing an application for the conversion of existing residential units to condominiums, the Planning Commission shall consider the vacancy rates of multiple-family rental units throughout the city at the time of the application. It is the intent of the city to assure that there is at least one suitable rental unit available and vacant for each unit converted to condominium ownership.

L. No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a planned unit development where the effect or purpose is to wall said project off from the rest of the community unless reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 740 section 10.5.60(B), 1984; Ord. 955 section 30, 1996; Ord 1634, 2024)
