16.35.040 Conditional uses.

Unless limited by subsection A below or section 16.35.045, conditional uses permitted in the C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone are permitted as conditional uses in the I-O zone, subject to the respective zone district boundaries.

A. Any proposed site development, change in use, land division, or other action that results in any of the following requires conditional use approval in the I-O zone:

1. Less than 3 employees per developed acre. For the purposes of this section only, “developed” means all areas used for buildings, landscaping, vehicle maneuvering and parking areas, outdoor storage, and other areas occupied by the use. For the purposes of this section only, employees means full-time equivalents unless the City specifically allows other interpretations;

2. More than 60 acres total in I-O zoning that is occupied by a single use or business. For the purposes of this section, businesses classified in the same NAICS industry group (four-digit code) are considered to be in the same use. This section is intended to apply cumulatively to all properties in the zone;

3. Utilization of any public service or utility to such an extent that the utility would not be able to supply all other uses projected in its current long-range plans;

4. Uses requiring an H occupancy under the Oregon Structural Specialty Code;

5. In any C-M zoning overlain by I-O zoning, any retail or commercial use with a building footprint exceeding 50,000 square feet;

6. In any M-1 or M-2 zoning overlain by I-O zoning, any retail or commercial use not related to or supportive of the primary industrial use of the park; or

7. In any M-1 or M-2 zoning overlain by I-O zoning, retail areas occupying more than 15% of the building footprint.

B. To approve a conditional use in the I-O zone, the Planning Commission shall find that each of the following additional criteria are either met, or can be met by observance of conditions, unless it is not applicable:

1. The proposed use is compatible with the industrial nature of the park and will have minimal negative impact on the development and use of surrounding properties;

2. The proposed use does not pose a threat to public health or safety; and

3. The proposed use is beneficial to the overall economic diversity and vitality of the City.

These criteria are in addition to those provided in Section 16.50.010. In all other aspects, the conditional use process shall be as specified in Chapter 16.50. (Ord 1008 section 1 [part], 1998, Ord. 1057 section 2 [part], 2000; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1514, 2019).
