16.08.110 Fences.

The City's fence code is intended to balance privacy with safety and aesthetic considerations.

A. In no case shall a fence be constructed in the vision clearance triangle of a street, alley, or pedestrian/bicycle pathway. This applies in all zones and in all lot configurations and supersedes all permitted fence heights identified in the subsections below. As defined in Chapter 16.04, vision clearance triangles must be free of obstructions between two and one-half feet and ten feet in height.

B. Fences not more than three and one-half feet in height may be constructed within the front street setbacks of any R-1, R-1.5, R-2, C-R, or C-1 zone. Fences not more than six feet in height may be constructed in any interior yard, rear yard, or along an alley.

C. On corner lots, fences may be constructed up to six feet in height along the secondary street frontage in the side yard setback (i.e., in the street-adjacent side yard), except where the side setback overlaps the lot's front setback. As with all fences within the front setback, fences that continue into the front setback must then step down to a maximum of three and a half feet.

D. On lots where a rear yard abuts a public street or alley (such as "through lots" as defined in Chapter 16.04), rear yard fences may be constructed up to six feet in height.

E. The Planning Commission may require sight-blocking or noise mitigating fences for any development it reviews. Any such requirement shall be tied to a specific adverse impact caused by the project (including impacts related to land use compatibility) and not required purely for aesthetic reasons.

Fences of up to eight feet in height are permitted for any development in C-2, C-M, M-1 or M-2 zones, including property lines where residential uses abut these zones.

F. No fence/wall shall be constructed throughout a subdivision, planned unit development or be part of a project that is/was subject to site and design review approval where the effect or purpose is to wall said project off from the rest of the community unless reviewed and approved bythe Planning Commission.

G. In R-1, R-1.5, R-2, C-R, and C-1 zones, private fences along a public pedestrian/bicycle pathway may be constructed up to six feet in height, except within a 20-foot setback along the street where they must step down to no more than three and one-half feet, as with other fences in those zones. In the C-2, C-M, M-1, and M-2 zones, private fences along public pedestrian pathways may be constructed up to eight feet but may not conflict with vision clearance requirements.

H. Use of hazardous materials. Fences and walls shall not be constructed of or contain any material which will do bodily harm, such as electric or barbed wire, razor wire, broken glass, spikes, or any other hazardous or dangerous material, except as follows:

1. Electrical fences categorically permitted by Oregon House Bill 4027.

2. In commercial and industrial zones barbed wire is permitted attached to the top of a fence that is at least six foot in height above grade; provided, that barbed wire shall not extend over a street, sidewalk, alley or roadway. The attached barbed wire shall be placed at least six inches above the top of the fence. (Ord. 890 section 8, 1993; Ord. 740 section 10.3.05(K), 1984; Ord. 955 section 2, 1996; Ord. 981 section 43, 1997; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019; Ord. 1655, 2025)
