16.35.050 Development standards.

The following subsections indicate the required development standards of the I-O zone. These standards replace the standards of the C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone, as follows:

A. Minimum lot area: none.

B. Minimum lot width and frontage: none.

C. Minimum yard requirements (measured from building foundation to right-of-way line):

1. Street yards(s): 20 feet for buildings up to 25 feet in height; 35 feet for buildings between 25 feet and 45 feet in height. Parking and internal drives (except curb cuts and entrance drives) are prohibited within the required 20 foot street yard.

2. Interior yard: 10 feet, except 20 feet where abutting a residential zone. Common-wall lot lines (attached buildings), and development which provide shared parking and circulation with abutting developments, are exempt from interior yard standards.

3. Rear yard: 10 feet, except 20 feet where abutting a residential zone. Common-wall lot lines (attached buildings), and development which provide shared parking and circulation with abutting developments, are exempt from interior yard standards.

D. Maximum building height: 45 feet.

E. Maximum lot coverage: 60 percent in the C-M zone; none in the M-1 and M-2 zones.

F. Street access (curb cuts) spacing shall be a minimum of 200 feet on designated parkway and collector streets.

G. Street right-of-way improvements shall be made in accordance with the Canby Transportation System Plan (TSP).

H. Building orientation standards. The following standards are intended to ensure direct, clear, and convenient pedestrian access:

1. Development in the M-1 zone and M-2 zone shall provide at least one public entrance facing the street. A direct pedestrian connection shall be provided between the primary building entrance and public sidewalk.

2. Developments within the C-M zone shall provide continuous, straight-line pedestrian connections between the street(s), buildings, and parking areas.

I.. Right-of-way plantings: Street trees and ground cover plantings shall be installed with development, as approved by the City. Shrubs are prohibited within the public right-of-way.

J. Metal building exteriors are prohibited, except that the Planning Commission may approve architectural metal elements that accent and enhance the aesthetics of building entrances and office areas

K. Lighting shall be required for all streets, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways. Applications for land division approval and site plan review shall include photometric plans.

L. Shared access: The City may require the provision of shared access drives through the land division review process. Shared access drives are intended to maintain adequate driveway spacing and circulation along the designated Parkway and Collector streets.

M. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated unless drought tolerant plants are installed and watered until well established and replaced in event of failure.

N. Other regulations: The C-M zone, M-1 zone, and M-2 zone provide other applicable regulations related to vision clearance, Highway 99E sidewalk width, setback measurement, outside storage, and wireless/cellular tower certification.

O. Open storage or “laydown yards” shall be screened by a six foot site-obscuring fence or hedge-type vegetation that would become a solid site obscuring barrier within three years of planting. (Ord. 1008 section 1[part], 1998; Ord. 1237, 2007; Ord. 1299, 2008; Ord. 1514, 2019)
