16.04.570 Street.

Street means the entire width between the right-of-way line of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the placement of utilities and including the terms road, highway, lane, place, avenue, alley, or other similar designations.

A. Alley means a narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.

B. Arterial means a street of considerable continuity which is primarily a traffic artery for intercommunication between large areas.

C. Collector means a street supplementary to the arterial street system and a means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas used to some extent for through traffic and to some extent for access to abutting properties.

D. Neighborhood connector means a street supplementary to the collector street system providing local access to adjacent properties as well as movement into or out of a neighborhood or between neighborhoods.

E. Cul-de-sac (dead-end street) means a short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turnaround.

F. Half-street means a portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another subdivision.

G. Marginal access or frontage street means a minor street parallel and adjacent to a major arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

H. Minor street means a street intended exclusively for access to abutting properties. (Ord. 740 section 10.1.20(B) [part], 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000)

I. Green street means a street that has been designed to integrate a system of stormwater management within its right of way. Green streets are intended to reduce the amount of runoff that is piped directly to the city stormwater system and/or streams and rivers. Green streets make the best use of the street tree canopy and natural filtration and drainage systems for stormwater interception and provide temperature mitigation and air quality improvements. (Ord. 1338, 2010)
