16.64.010 Streets.

A. Generally. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by the streets. The street system shall assure an adequate traffic circulation pattern with intersection angles, grades, tangents, and curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried. Where location is not shown in a development plan, the arrangement of streets shall either:

1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or

2. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance of conformance to existing street patterns impractical;

3. Minimum right-of-way and roadway width shall follow the requirements of the Canby Public Works Design Standards;

4. Consider opportunities to incrementally extend and connect local streets to provide for safe and convenient bike and pedestrian circulation.

B. Permeable Surfaces. Permeable surfacing alternatives and on-site stormwater management facilities, are encouraged for street improvements. Permeable surfacing and LID stormwater management facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards and the manufacturer’s recommendations. Permeable surfacing includes, but is no limited to: paving blocks, turf block, pervious concrete, porous asphalt, and other similar approved materials. Alternative surfacing methods may be approved for public and private roads, road shoulders, pedestrian ways, driveways, and easement service roads unless site constraints make use of such materials detrimental to water quality. Use of permeable surfacing methods shall meet the imposed load requirements for fire apparatus, and shall be subject to review and approval by the Canby Public Works Department.

C. Reserve Strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling the access to streets will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, or both, and in no case unless the control and disposal of the land composing such strips is placed within the jurisdiction of the city, under conditions approved by the commission.

D. Alignment. All streets other than minor streets or cul-de-sacs, shall, as far as possible, be in alignment with the existing streets by continuations of the center lines thereof. Jogs creating "T" intersections shall have centerline offsets of not less than one hundred fifty feet, unless it is found that community benefits of such an alignment outweigh its disadvantages.

E. Future Extension of Streets. Where a subdivision adjoins unplatted acreage, streets which in the opinion of the commission should be continued in the event of the subdivision of the acreage, will be required to be provided through to the boundary lines of the tract. Reserve strips, street plugs and temporary turnaround areas may be required to preserve the objectives of street extensions. Reserve strips and street plugs shall be deeded to the city prior to final plat approval. The Planning Commission may require that the costs of title insurance and recordation fees, if any, for such areas be borne by the subdivider. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, a traffic pedestrian, or safety hazard temporarily exists by the construction of a dead-end street, he may direct that a barricade of adequate design be installed at the developer's expense as one of the required improvement items for the subdivision.

F. Intersection Angles. Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles of less than thirty degrees will be approved unless necessitated by topographic conditions. When intersections of other than ninety degrees are unavoidable, the right-of-way lines along the acute angle shall have a minimum corner radius of twelve feet. All right-of-way lines at intersections with arterial streets shall have a corner radius of not less than twelve feet.

G. Existing Streets. Whenever existing streets, adjacent to or within a tract, are of inadequate width, dedication of additional right-of-way shall be provided at the time of subdivision.

H. Half Streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision, when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and when the commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. Reserve strips, street plugs, special signs and barricades may be required to preserve the objectives of half streets.

I. Cul-de-sacs. A cul-de-sac shall only be allowed when environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation. When cul-de-sacs are provided, all of the following shall be met:

1. The cul-de-sac shall not exceed a length of 400 feet. Length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac;

2. The cul-de-sac shall be designed in accordance with the Canby Public Works Design Standards.

3. The cul-de-sac may have a vegetated center island that will serve to treat stormwater runoff generated by the cul-de-sac. Specifications for cul-de-sac design are located in the Public Works Design Standards.

4. The cul-de-sac shall provide a pedestrian connection between it and adjacent streets, access ways, parks, or other right-of-way. Such pedestrian ways shall conform to Section 16.64.030(C).

J. Marginal Access Streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the commission may require marginal access streets, through lots with suitable depth, screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

K. Alleys.

1. Alleys shall be provided to commercial and industrial districts, unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are made as approved by the commission.

2. Alleys shall be provided within residential subdivisions when streets are designed to meet the narrow “green” street standards in the Canby Public Works Design Standards. Visitor parking areas may be required by the city to mitigate the lack of on-street parking.

3. When alleys are provided as part of a new residential subdivision, streets shall be designed in accordance with the narrow “green” street standards in the Canby Public Works Design Standards. Visitor parking areas may be required by the city to mitigate the lack of on-street parking.

4. Alley intersection corners shall have a minimum radius of ten feet.

L. Street Names. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of existing streets except for extensions of existing streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the city and the surrounding area and shall be subject to the approval of the commission.

M. Planting Easements. The Planning Commission may require additional easements for planting street trees or shrubs.

N. Grades and Curbs. Grades shall not exceed seven percent on arterials, ten percent on collector streets, or fifteen percent on any other street. In flat areas allowance shall be made for finished street grades having a minimum slope of .5 percent. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than three hundred feet on major arterials, two hundred feet on secondary arterials, or one hundred feet on other streets, unless specifically approved by the City, and shall be to an even ten feet.

O. Streets Adjacent to Highway 99-E or Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way or Highway 99-E, provisions may be required for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land between the streets and the railroad or Highway 99-E. The distances shall be determined with due consideration of cross streets at a minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way.

P. Private streets created within a new subdivision or partition shall be designated as a separate “tract” on the submitted plat map. (Ord. 740 section 10.4.40(C)(1), 1984; Ord. 1043 section 3, 2000; Ord 1237, 2007; Ord. 1338, 2010; Ord. 1514, 2019)
