16.49.050 Conditions placed on site and design review approvals.

A. A site and design review approval may include restrictions and conditions. These restrictions and conditions shall be reasonably conceived to:

1. Protect the public from the potentially deleterious effects of the proposal; and/or

2. Fulfill the need for services created, increased or in part attributable to the proposal; and/or

3. Further the implementation of the requirements of the Canby Municipal Code.

B. The following types of conditions may be contemplated, and the listing below is intended to be illustrative only and not to be construed as a limitation of the authority granted by this section.

1. Development Schedule. A reasonable time schedule may be placed on construction activities associated with the proposed development, or any portion thereof.

2. Dedications, Reservation. Dedication or reservation of land, or fee in lieu thereof for park, open space purposes, rights-of-way, bicycle or pedestrian paths, green way, riverbank or easements; the conveyance of title or easements to a homeowners' association.

3. Construction and Maintenance Guarantees. Security from the property owners in such an amount that will assure compliance with approval granted.

4. Plan Modification. Changes in the design or intensity of the proposed development, or in proposed construction methods or practices, necessary to assure compliance with this Ordinance.

5. Off-Site Improvements. Improvements in public facilities, including public utilities, not located on the project site where necessary to assure adequate capacity and where service demand will be created or increased by the proposed development. The costs of such improvements may be paid for in full while allowing for recovery of costs from users on other development sites, or they may be pro-rated to the proposed development in proportion to the service demand projected to be created on increases by the project. If determined appropriate by the city based on specific site conditions, off-site roadway improvements may be required to accommodate bicycle and pedestrian travel consistent with the TSP and applicable sections of this code.

6. Other Approvals. Evaluation, inspections or approval by other agencies, jurisdictions, public utilities or qualified consultants may be required for all or any part of the proposed development.

7. Access Limitation. The number, location and design of street accesses to a proposed development may be limited or specified where necessary to maintain the capacity of streets to carry traffic safely, provided that sufficient access to the development is maintained.

8. Screening. The Planning Commission may require additional screening with landscaping, decorative fencing, decorative walls, or other means in Ord.er to screen outdoor storage areas, rooftop/ground mechanical equipment, garbage/recycling areas, or other visual clutter. (Ord.. 890 section 44, 1993; Ord.. 848, Part III, section 3, 1991; 1340, 2011)
