PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

                                                       Administration
Section  4.000.    Administration—Purpose and Title.
Section  4.001     Definitions.
Section  4.002.    Scope, Interpretation and Compliance.
Section  4.003.    Consistency with Plan and Laws.
Section  4.004.    Development Permit Required.
Section  4.005     Exclusions from Development Permit Requirement.
Section  4.006.    Use of a Development.
Section  4.007     Lawfully Existing Development.
Section  4.008.    Application Procedures—In General.
Section  4.009.    Who May Initiate Applications.
Section  4.010.    How to Apply.
Section  4.011.    How Applications are Processed.
Section  4.012.    Public Hearing Notices.
Section  4.013.    Hearing Procedures.
Section  4.014.    Burden of Proof.
Section  4.015.    Findings and Conditions.
Section  4.016.    Notification of Action on Applications.
Section  4.017.    Withdrawal of Application
Section  4.018.    Participation by Interested Officers or Employees.
Section  4.019.    Hearing Body—Conflicts of Interest.
Section  4.020.    Ex Parte Contacts.
Section  4.021.    Record of Proceedings.
Section  4.022.    Appeal and Call-up Procedures.
Section  4.023.    Expiration of Development Approvals (See also Section 4.140).
Section  4.024.    Prohibition of Resubmittal After Application Denial.
Section  4.025.    Enforcement and Administration.
Section  4.026.    Enforcement Procedures and Penalties.
Section  4.027.    Saving Clause (Severability).
Section  4.028.    Fees.
Section  4.029.    Zoning to be Consistent with Comprehensive Plan.
Section  4.030.    JurisdictionandPowersof PlanningDirectorandCommunityDevelopmentDirector.
Section  4.031.    Authority of the Development Review Board.
Section  4.032.    Authority of the Planning Commission.
Section  4.033.    Authority of City Council.
Section  4.034.    Application Requirements.
Section  4.035.    Site Development Permits.

                                                            Zoning
Section  4.100.    Zoning—Purpose.
Section  4.101.    Zoning—Interpretation.
Section  4.102.    Zoning—Official Zoning Map.
Section  4.110.    Zoning—Zones.
Section  4.111.    Zoning—Zone Boundary Lines.

                                                          CD4:1
                                              WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.113.    Standards Applying to Residential Developments in any Zone.
Section  4.115.    Standards Applying to Manufactured Housing in all Zones Where Manufactured
                    Housing is Permitted.
Section  4.116.    Standards Applying to Commercial Developments in any Zone.
Section  4.117.    Standards Applying to Industrial Developments in any Zone.
Section  4.118.    Standards Applying to all Planned Development Zones.
Section  4.120.    Zones. FDA-H Future Development Agricultural—Holding Zone.
Section  4.122.    Residential Zone.
Section  4.123.    Old Town Residential (OTR) Zone.
Section  4.124.    Standards Applying to all Planned Development Residential Zones.
Section  4.125.    V—Village Zone.
Section  4.127.    Residential Neighborhood (RN) Zone.
Section  4.131.    PDC—Planned Development Commercial Zone.
Section  4.132.    Town Center Zone.
Section  4.133.00.  Wilsonville Road Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP) Overlay Zone.
Section  4.133.01.  Purpose.
Section  4.133.02.  Where these Regulations Apply.
Section  4.133.03.  Permitted Land Uses.
Section  4.133.04.  Access Management.
Section  4.133.05.  Administration.
Section  4.133.06.  Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Amendments.
Section  4.134.    Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.
Section  4.135.    PDI—Planned Development Industrial Zone.
Section  4.135.5.  Planned Development Industrial—Regionally Significant Industrial Area.
Section  4.136.    PF—Public Facility Zone.
Section  4.136.5.  PF-C—Public Facility—Corrections Zone.
Section  4.137.    Solar Access for New Residential Development.
Section  4.137.2.  Solar Balance Point Standards.
Section  4.137.3.  Solar Access Permit Standards.
Section  4.137.5.  Screening and Buffering (SB) Overlay Zone.
Section  4.138.    Old Town (O) Overlay Zone.
Section  4.139.00.  Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SROZ) Ordinance.
Section  4.139.01.  SROZ—Purpose.
Section  4.139.02.  Where these Regulations Apply.
Section  4.139.03.  Administration.
Section  4.139.04.  Uses and Activities Exempt from These Regulations.
Section  4.139.05.  Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map Verification.
Section  4.139.06.  Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR) and Review Criteria.
Section  4.139.07.  Mitigation Standards.
Section  4.139.08.  Activities Requiring a Class I Administrative Review Process.
Section  4.139.09.  Activities Requiring a Class II Administrative Review Process.
Section  4.139.10.  Development Review Board (DRB) Process.
Section  4.139.11.  Special Provisions.
Section  4.140.    Planned Development Regulations.
Section  4.141.    Special Regulations—Changes of Use.

                                           General Development Regulations
Section  4.154.    On-site Pedestrian Access and Circulation.
Section  4.155.    General Regulations—Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

                                                         CD4:2
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

Section  4.156.01.  Sign Regulations Purpose and Objectives.
Section  4.156.02.  Sign Review Process and General Requirements.
Section  4.156.03.  Sign Measurement.
Section  4.156.04.  Non-Conforming Signs.
Section  4.156.05.  Signs Exempt from Sign Permit Requirements.
Section  4.156.06.  Prohibited Signs.
Section  4.156.07.  Sign Regulations in Residential Zones.
Section  4.156.08.  Sign Regulations in the PDC, TC, PDI, and PF Zones.
Section  4.156.09.  Temporary Signs in all Zones.
Section  4.156.10.  Signs on City and ODOT Right-of-Way.
Section  4.156.11.  Sign Enforcement.
Section  4.162.    General Regulations—Livestock and Farm Animals.
Section  4.163.    General Regulations—Temporary Structures and Uses.
Section  4.164.    General Regulations—Uses Not Listed.
Section  4.166.    General Regulations—Unsafe Buildings.
Section  4.167.    General Regulations—Access, Ingress and Egress.
Section  4.169.    General Regulations—Double-Frontage Lots.
Section  4.171.    General Regulations—Protection of Natural Features and Other Resources.
Section  4.172.    Flood Plain Regulations.
Section  4.175.    Public Safety and Crime Prevention.
Section  4.176.    Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering.
Section  4.177.    Street Improvement Standards.
Section  4.178.    Sidewalk and Pathway Standards.
Section  4.179.    Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage in New Multi-Family Residential and
                    Non-Residential Buildings.
Section  4.180.    Exceptions and Modifications—Projections into Required Yards.
Section  4.181.    Exceptions and Modifications—Height Limits.
Section  4.182.    Exceptions and Modifications—Setback Modifications.
Section  4.184.    Conditional Use Permits—Authorization.
Section  4.189.    Non-Conforming Uses.
Section  4.190.    Non-Conforming Structures.
Section  4.191.    Non-Conforming Site Conditions.
Section  4.192.    Non-Conforming Lots.
Section  4.196.    Variances.
Section  4.197.    Zone Changes and Amendments to this Code—Procedures.
Section  4.198.    Comprehensive Plan Changes—Adoption by the City Council.
Section  4.199.    Outdoor Lighting.
Section  4.199.10.  Outdoor Lighting In General.
Section  4.199.20.  Applicability.
Section  4.199.30.  Lighting Overlay Zones.
Section  4.199.40.  Lighting Systems Standards for Approval.
Section  4.199.50.  Submittal Requirements.
Section  4.199.60.  Major Additions or Modifications to Pre-Existing Sites.

                                                         Land Divisions
Section  4.200.    General—Purpose.
Section  4.202.    General—Authorization.
Section  4.210.    Application Procedure.
Section  4.220.    Final Plat Review.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:3
                                                                 WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.232.    Expedited Land Divisions and Middle Housing Land Divisions.
Section  4.233.    Lot Line Adjustments.
Section  4.236.    General Requirements—Streets.
Section  4.237.    General Requirements—Other.
Section  4.250.    Lots of Record.
Section  4.260.    Improvements—Procedures.
Section  4.262.    Improvements—Requirements.
Section  4.264.    Improvements—Assurance.
Section  4.270.    Variance from Land Division Standards.
Section  4.280.    Appeals.
Section  4.290.    Penalties.

                                                      Underground Utilities
Section  4.300.    General.
Section  4.310     Exceptions.
Section  4.320.    Requirements.

                                                        Site Design Review
Section  4.400.    Purpose.
Section  4.420.    Review Authority for Site Design Review.
Section  4.421.    Criteria and Application of Design Standards.
Section  4.430.    Location, Design and Access Standards for Mixed Solid Waste and Recycling Areas.
Section  4.440.    Procedure.
Section  4.441.    Effective Date of Decisions.
Section  4.442.    Time Limit on Approval.
Section  4.450.    Installation of Landscaping.

                                                   Willamette River Greenway
Section  4.500.    General Purpose.
Section  4.504.    General—Greenway Boundaries.
Section  4.506.    General—Uses Permitted Outright.
Section  4.508.    Conditional Use Permit—Uses Permitted Conditionally.
Section  4.510.    Conditional Use Permit—Findings In Support of Granting.
Section  4.512.    Conditional Use Permit—Application Procedures.
Section  4.514.    Conditional Use Permit—Use Management Standards.

                                               Tree Preservation and Protection
Section  4.600.    Purpose and Declaration.
Section  4.600.20.  Applicability of Subchapter.
Section  4.600.30.  Tree Removal Permit Required.
Section  4.600.40.  Exceptions.
Section  4.600.50.  Application for Tree Removal Permit.
Section  4.610.00.  Application Review Procedure.
Section  4.610.10.  Standards for Tree Removal, Relocation or Replacement.
Section  4.610.20.  Type A Permit.
Section  4.610.30.  Type B Permit.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:4
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

Section  4.610.40.  Type C Permit.
Section  4.610.50.  Type D Permit.
Section  4.620.00.  Tree Relocation, Mitigation, or Replacement.
Section  4.620.10.  Tree Protection During Construction.
Section  4.620.20.  Maintenance and Protection Standards.
Section  4.630.00.  Appeal.
Section  4.630.10.  Display of Permit; Inspection.
Section  4.630.20.  Variance for Hardship.
Section  4.630.30.  Severability.
Section  4.640.00.  Violation; Enforcement.
Section  4.640.10.  Alternative Enforcement.
Section  4.640.20.  Responsibility for Enforcement.

                                Annexations and Urban Growth Boundary Amendments
Section  4.700.    Procedures Relating to the Processing of Requests for Annexation and Urban Growth
                     Boundary Amendments.

                                             Wireless Communications Facilities
Section  4.800.    Wireless Communications Facilities—Permitted, Condit ionally Permitted, and Prohib-
                     ited Uses.
Section  4.801.    Application Requirements.
Section  4.802.    Co-Location.
Section  4.803.    Development Review Standards.
Section  4.804.    Review Process and Approval Standards.
Section  4.805.    Damage, Destruction, or Interference to Other Utilities.
Section  4.806.    Maintenance.
Section  4.807.    Permit Tracking.
Section  4.808.    Inspections.
Section  4.809.    Preexisting WCF.
Section  4.810.    Ancillary Facilities.
Section  4.811.    Abandoned Facilities; Discontinuation of Use.
Section  4.812.    Mandatory and Automatic Permit Conditions.
Section  4.813.    Mandatory and Automatic Permit Conditions of Approval for Section 6409(a).

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:5

                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

                                                  ADMINISTRATION

Section  4.000.  Administration—Purpose and Title.

(.01)  Chapter 4 of this Code is enacted for the purpose of promoting the general public welfare by
       ensuring procedural due process in the administration and enforcement of the City's Comprehen-
       sive Plan, Zoning, Design Review, Land Division, and Development Standards.

(.02)  This ordinance shall be known as the Planning and Land Development Ordinance. It shall include
       those ordinances familiarly referred to as the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Sign
       Ordinance, Tree Preservation Ordinance, Development Code, etc.

Section  4.001.  Definitions.

In addition to the definitions set forth in Section 4.001, below, for the purpose of this Chapter, the
following terms are hereby defined. The word "occupy" includes premises designed or intended to be
occupied. The word "shall" is always mandatory. All other words shall have the following respective
meanings, unless the context otherwise requires:

       1.      Abutting: See Adjoining.

       2.      Access, Vehicular: The designed location of ingress and egress, where vehicles enter or leave
              property.

       3.      Access, Pedestrian: The designed location of ingress and egress, where pedestrians enter or
              leave property.

       4.      Access Control Restriction: A type of access restriction that involves establishing a reserve
              area adjacent to and paralleling a half street improvement, or across the end of a street that
              is to be extended in the future, to ensure proper participation by adjoining properties in
              completion of the required street improvements. See Street, Half.

       5.      Access Drive: A private travel lane primarily used as a means of approach for vehicles.

       6.      Accessory Building or Use: A subordinate building or use, the function of which is clearly
              incidental to that of the main building or use on the same lot. For non-residential uses, an
              accessory use may be located on a lot adjoining that of the main use if approved for this
              purpose through the Administrative Review procedures of Section 4.030.

       7.      Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit of not more than 800 square feet of habitable floor
              area subordinate to another dwelling unit on the same lot.

       8.      Address Overlay Zone: Distinct areas within the Villebois Village Center where additional
              information is provided for the definition of architectural character and community ele-
              ments.

       9.      Addressing street: A major existing or planned street within the Coffee Creek Industrial
              Design Overlay District as defined in Section 4.134.

       10.    Adjacent: See adjoining.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:7
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       11.    Adjoining: Contiguous or abutting exclusive of  street width. It shall include the terms
              adjacent, abutting or contiguous.
       12.    Agriculture: The use of land larger than one acre for the primary purpose of deriving income
              from growing plants on land including, but not limited to, land used principally for the
              production of crops, land used for orchards or production of fruit, but not including land
              used primarily for another use and incidentally for growing plants, crops, or fruit.
       13.    Alley: A public or private way which includes a roadway used to provide vehicular ingress and
              egress to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street, private drive, or shared
              common area. An alley typically has a width of no more than 20 feet.

       14.    Alteration, Structural: Any change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the
              supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
              girders.
       15.    Ancillary Telecommunication Facilities: The structures and equipment required for operation
              of  the telecommunication equipment, including but not limited to antennae, repeaters,
              equipment housing structure, footings and foundations, and ventilation or other electrical or
              mechanical equipment.
       16.    Antenna(e): Any exterior, apparatus, electrical conductor or group of electrical conductors,
              the surface of  which is designed for telephonic, radio or television communications by
              sending and/or receiving radio-frequency or electromagnetic waves, including those sent
              and/or received by wireless communication facilities. Antennae include the following types:
              A.     Directional or Parabolic ("panel" or "disk") antenna, which receives and transmits
                     signals in a directional pattern typically encompassing an arc of 120 degrees.
              B.      Omni-direction ("whip") antenna, which receives and transmits signals in a 360-degree
                     pattern.
              C.     Other, which means all other transmitting or receiving equipment not specifically
                     described herein. Other antennae shall be regulated in conformity with the type of
                     antenna described herein which most closely resembles such equipment. For purposes
                     of this ordinance, the term antenna shall not include ancillary antennae, which are
                     antennae less than 12 inches in their largest dimension and are not directly used to
                     provide personal wireless communication services.
              D.     Satellite Dish antenna, which receives signals from satellites.

       17.    Apartment: A type of attached multi-family dwelling unit in a building that contains five or
              more dwelling units.
       18.    Appeal: Means a request for a review of any land use decision or interpretation of any
              provision of this ordinance.

       19.    Appropriate Potential Tree Height: The Appropriate Potential Tree Height (APTH) is used to
              delineate certain areas adjacent to the riparian corridor. The APTH is the mature average
              height of the appropriate tree species that does or could potentially grow on the site. The term
              "appropriate" is meant to limit the potential tree species to those species that provide critical

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:8
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.001

              riparian functions, and are appropriate and acceptable on the specific site based on such
              factors as public safety, property protection, zoning and other factors. The minimum APTH
              is 50 feet.

       20.    Arborist: An arborist who is a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists
              (ASCA) or is certified by the International Society of Arboriculture, or an ornamental
              horticulturist or urban forester who possesses equivalent credentials and experience, and who
              is approved by the City Planning Director.
       21.    Architectural Character: The distinctive qualities of the form, features, details, color and
              ornamentation that comprise a style of building.

       22.    Area of Limited Conflicting Uses: See Section 4.139.00

       23.    Area of Shallow Flooding: Means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate
              Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel
              does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow
              may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
       24.    Area of Special Flood Hazard: Means the land in the flood plain within a community subject
              to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This is the area subject to a
              base flood event. Designation on FIRM maps always includes the letters A or V.

       25.    Artificial Sky Glow: The brightening of the night sky attributable to human made sources of
              light.

       26.    Attached Wireless Communication Facility: A wireless communication facility that is affixed
              to an existing structure, (e.g., an existing building wall or roof, mechanical equipment, or
              alternative tower structure).
       27.    Attachment: An antenna or other piece of related equipment affixed to a transmission tower.

       28.    Base Flood: Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
              given year. Also referred to as the "l00-year flood". Designation on FIRM maps always
              includes the letters A or V.

       29.    Basement: A portion of a building which has less than one-half of its height measured from
              finished floor to finished ceiling above the average elevation of the adjoining grade. For areas
              located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the definition of basement is any area of the building
              having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

       30.    Bed and Breakfast Home or Boarding House: A building or premises used for the provision of
              lodging and meals, where not more than five rooms are available for rent. Does not include
              short-term rentals.

       31.    Bikeway: Bikeway is a general term used to describe any type of transportation facility that
              is designated for use by bicycles in conformance with City standards. Bikeways may or may
              not be within a public right-of-way and include the following:
              A.     Bike Lane: A bike lane facility is a type of bikeway where a section of the roadway is
                     designated for exclusive bicycle use.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:9
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              B.      Recreational Trail: A recreation trail is a type of pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian
                     facility that is entirely separate from roadways and has unimproved, gravel, or bark dust
                     surface.
              C.     Shared Roadway: A shared roadway facility is a type of bikeway where motorists and
                     cyclists occupy the same roadway area.
              D.     Shoulder Bikeway: A shoulder bikeway facility is a type of bikeway where cyclists
                     occupy the paved roadway shoulder. Shoulder bikeways are common in rural areas.
              E.     Cycle Track: A cycle track is a bike lane with a physical barrier between the bike and
                     motor vehicle travel lanes, such as a curb or parking lanes. Cycle tracks must "rejoin"
                     the motor vehicle travel lanes at signalized intersections. Cycle tracks may require a two
                     stage left turn for bicyclists.
              F.      See also: Multipurpose Pathway or Path.

       32.    Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or bounded by such features as the City limits or
              barriers such as bodies of water or steep slopes.

       33.    Block Complex: An assemblage of buildings bounded entirely by intersecting streets so as to
              form a single, comprehensive group.

       34.    Block Perimeter: The outer boundary of a block.

       35.    Board: The Development Review Board established pursuant to Chapter 2 of the Wilsonville
              Code.

       36.    Buffers or Buffering: Distance, landscaping, walls, berms, or other measures used to separate
              one land use from another, and to mitigate or minimize the adverse effects of one land use on
              another.

       37.    Build-To Line: A line shown on a final plat or other development plan indicating that
              buildings are required to be built to it, rather than set back from it.

       38.    Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of any persons, animals,
              chattels, or property of any kind which requires location on the ground or is attached to
              something having a location on the ground.

       39.    Building Façade: The exterior elevation(s) of a building; usually set parallel to the front lot
              line, often distinguished by elaboration of architectural characteristics.

       40.    Building Façade, Primary: The main exterior elevation of a building; usually associated with
              its primary entrance and/or street address.

       41.    Building Frontage Width, Minimum: A Development Standard that controls the degree of
              spatial definition of public open space. Described as a percentage, the Minimum Building
              Frontage Width is calculated as the ratio of the length of the primary building façade(s) to its
              corresponding lot line length, exclusive of required setbacks.

       42.    Building Line: A line that is adjacent to the front side of a main building parallel to the front
              lot line.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:10
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.001

       43.    Building Official. The person holding the position of  Building Official of  the City of
              Wilsonville.

       44.    Building or Structure Height: The term 'height of building or structure' shall be deemed to
              mean the perpendicular distance from the average elevation of the adjoining ground to the
              highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
              middle height gable between the eaves and ridge of a pitch or hip roof. If a building is divided
              into units by means of masonry division walls, each unit shall be considered separately in
              calculation for height of building.

       45.    Business-Integrated Dwelling Unit(s) (BIDU): A dwelling unit integrated with a non-
              residential use where (1) the dwelling unit is the secondary use to the non-residential use, (2)
              the dwelling unit consists of a ground floor footprint less than or equal to 40 percent of the
              ground floor non-residential use, (3) the dwelling unit is separated from the non-residential
              use by a demising wall, and (4) the dwelling unit has direct interior entry from the non-
              residential use. This is differentiated from a Live-Work Dwelling Unit in that the dwelling
              unit must be fully divided from the non-residential use and that the space designed to be
              non-residential cannot be used for residential.

       46.    Candela. The unit of luminous intensity of a lighting source emitted in a given direction.

       47.    Canopy. A roof-like covering over an area, in or under which a lighting fixture is mounted.

       48.    Category of Use: Type of use. See Mixed Use.

       49.    Change of Use: Within the Willamette River Greenway means making a different use of the
              land or water than that which existed on December 6, 1975. It includes a change which
              requires construction, alterations of the land, water or other areas outside of the existing
              buildings or structures and which substantially alters or affects the land or water. It does not
              include a change of use of a building or other structure which does not substantially alter or
              affect the land or water upon which it is situated. The sale of  property is not in itself
              considered to be a change of use. An existing open storage area shall be considered to be the
              same as a building. Landscaping, construction of  driveways, modifications of  existing
              structures, or the construction or placement of such subsidiary structures or facilities as are
              usual and necessary to the use and enjoyment of  existing improvements shall not be
              considered a change of use for the purposes of Sections 4.500.

       49.1.  Charging Station: a device or facility for delivering electricity for motor vehicles that use
              electricity for propulsion that is accessible to a vehicle parked in a nearby space.

       50.    Civic: Relating to, or derived from, a city or citizen.

       51.    Civic Building or Place: A building or place that functions communally, such as religious,
              cultural, environmental or educational institutions.

       52.    Clear Vision Area: A standard for sight lines at intersections of  streets, railways, and
              driveways. See section 4.125.09, Street Improvement Standards.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:11
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       53.    Cluster Housing: Detached dwelling units on a single lot meeting one of the sub-definitions
              A.—D. below. A type of middle housing.

              A.     Cottage Cluster: Cluster housing of  four or more units in which each unit has a
                     footprint of 900 square feet or less and units have a common courtyard(s) containing
                     shared green space.

              B.      Two-Unit Cluster Housing: Cluster housing containing two units where neither unit is
                     an Accessory Dwelling Unit.

              C.     Three-Unit Cluster Housing: Cluster housing containing three units.

              D.     Four-Unit Cluster Housing: Cluster housing containing four units but not meeting the
                     definition of cottage cluster.

       54.    Cluster Housing (Frog Pond West Master Plan): A type of detached dwelling unit develop-
              ment arranged in groups, each unit on its own lot, with a courtyard(s) containing shared
              green space and a public access sidewalk easement. Cluster Housing, as used in the Frog Pond
              West Master Plan, is not considered a type of middle housing.

       55.    Cohousing: Cohousing is an intentional community of private homes clustered around a
              shared space, with design features to promote frequent interaction and close relationships.
              Cohousing can be comprised of a single housing type or a variety of housing types, as
              permitted by the base zone. Applicable regulations are determined by the base zone, specific
              housing types involved, and applicable regulations such as master plans.

       56.    Commercial: Development having to do with retail, service, commercial recreation, and/or
              office uses.

       57.    Common courtyard: A common area for use by residents of a cottage cluster or other type of
              residential development. A common courtyard may function as a community yard. Hard and
              soft landscape features may be included in a common courtyard, such as pedestrian paths,
              lawn, groundcover, trees, shrubs, patios, benches, or gazebos.

       58.    Common Residential Areas.

              •        Areas shared in common by residents of buildings with three or more dwelling units,
                     (i.e. common open space, play areas, trash receptacle areas, "common property" under
                     a subdivision or partition declaration); and

              •        Three or more open off-street stripped parking spaces, either abutting or within 10 feet
                     of each other and not separated by a wall or other physical barrier between the two
                     parking spaces, designated or set aside for use by the three or more dwelling units,
                     regardless of whether the parking space is assigned for exclusive use of each dwelling
                     unit or non-exclusively used by three or more dwelling units, and are either commonly
                     owned or were developed for the purpose of serving the parking needs of "multiple
                     dwellings" or multiple attached single-family dwellings, as defined in the Development
                     Code.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:12
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.001

      59.    Community Center: A structure for the social, cultural, and educational activities of an entire
             neighborhood or group of people having common rights, privileges, or interests, or living in
             the same place under the same laws and regulations.
      60.    Community Elements Book: A plan which is used to establish the type and location of
             community elements within the Village zone. Community elements may include lighting, site

Supp. No. 6                                            CD4:12.1

                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

              furniture, bollards, trash receptacles, recycling receptacles, benches, bicycle racks, and play-
              ground equipment. The Community Elements Book also includes a Street Tree Master Plan
              and Lighting Master Plan.

       61.    Community Housing: Dwellings developed as defined by ORS 426.502(2).
       62.    Collocation: The use or placement of two or more antenna systems or platforms by separate
              FCC license holders on a single support structure, transmission tower or building.

       63.    Commercial Nursery or Tree Farm. A plant or tree nursery or tree farm where trees are
              planted and grown on the premises for sale in the ordinary course of business, but not
              including commercial woodlots, or land that is designated or assessed as forest land for tax
              deferral purposes or managed for timber production.

       64.    Commercial Recreation: A planned development commercial center or complex of recre-
              ational and complimentary uses. Typical uses include miniature golf courses, bowling alleys,
              theaters, tennis and racquetball clubs, health spas, swim centers, pool halls and sports
              complexes. Appropriate complimentary uses would include restaurants and sporting goods
              stores.

       65.    Commercial Woodlot. A site of at least 30,000 square feet on which trees are grown for the
              purpose of harvesting, and which is assessed as forest land for tax deferral purposes, and
              which is not a part of the approved open space or landscaping of a previously approved
              development.

       66.    Commission: The Planning Commission of the City established in Chapter 2 of the Wilsonville
              Code.

       67.    Comprehensive Plan: The City of Wilsonville Comprehensive Plan (effective date June 7,
              2000).

       68.    Conditional Use: A use allowable if processed in accordance with the procedures listed in
              Section 4.512 and 4.184.

       69.    Conference Center: A facility where the primary function is the formal gathering of large
              groups of people.

       70.    Contiguous: See Adjoining.

       71.    Convenience Store: A retail business that provides for the purchase of limited food and
              household sundries.

       72.    Cottage cluster project: A development site with one or more cottage clusters.

       73.    Critical Facility: Facilities for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great.
              Critical facilities include, but are not limited to schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire
              and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous
              materials or hazardous waste.

       74.    Crown Cover: The area within the drip line or perimeter of the foliage of a tree.

       75.    Curb Line: The line indicating the edge of the roadway within the overall right-of-way.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:13
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       76.    Curfew. A time each night after which certain electric illumination must be turned off or
              reduced in intensity.
       77.    DATELUP: An acronym for the Dammasch Area Transportation-Efficient Land Use Plan,
              which is the City of Wilsonville's 1997 adopted land-use plan within the Comprehensive Plan
              Area of Special Concern "B".

       78.    Design: The conceptualization of the built environment in response to specific sets of human
              needs and desires.
       79.    Design Standards, Village Center: Criteria applicable to the design and construction of
              development within the Village Center, to guide the selection and arrangement of building
              elements to achieve a minimum level of quality and consistency in the finished product.

       80.    Design Principles, Village Zone: The fundamental concepts that support the objectives of the
              Master Plan and guide the intrinsic qualities of the built environment within the Residential
              Village Plan District. Design Principles are implemented through conformance with the
              Design Standards.
       81.    Design Standards, Village Zone: Criteria applicable to the design and construction of
              development within the Village zone, to guide the selection and arrangement of building
              elements to achieve a minimum level of quality and consistency in the finished product.
       82.    Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.

       83.    Development: Any human-caused change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
              but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
              excavation or drilling operations located or storage of equipment or materials located within
              the area of special flood hazard.
       84.    Development Area, Gross: The total or entire area of a Stage I Master Plan, or if no Stage I
              Master Plan is required a Tentative Plat, after subtracting out (1) land area within the City's
              Significant Resource Overlay Zone and (2) land area encumbered by a Bonneville Power
              Administration power line easement.

       85.    Development Area, Net: The portion of Gross Development Area that is not required for
              open space in tracts, stormwater facilities in tracts, other similar common-use tracts, or
              public right-of-way. Net Development Area includes areas used for off-street parking,
              alleyways and off-street circulation areas, areas covered by primary and accessory structures,
              private and semi-private yard space on individual lots, and landscaping and hardscape not
              otherwise excluded by this definition.
       86.    Development Standards: Criteria established for initial planning of any change to improved
              or unimproved real estate that determines the relative size and arrangement of common
              building elements in order to achieve a certain level of quality and consistency in the built
              environment.

       87.    Diameter Breast Height (d.b.h.): A tree's diameter in inches measured by diameter tape at
              four and one-half feet above grade. On multi-stem trees, the largest diameter stem shall be
              measured.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:14
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.001

       88.    Director: The Planning Director as established in Section 2.190 of the Wilsonville Code. As
              used in this Chapter, the term "Planning Director" also applies to other staff persons or
              consultants specifically assigned to act on behalf of the Director.

       89.    Drip Line: An imaginary vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of the
              tree branches to the ground; when delineating the drip line on the ground, it will appear as an
              irregularly shaped circle defining the canopy's perimeter.

       90.    Driveway Approach: A driveway connection to a public street or highway where it meets a
              public right-of-way.

       91.    Duplex: Two attached dwelling units on a single lot, neither of which meets the definition of
              an accessory dwelling unit.

       92.    Dwelling: A building, mobile home, or manufactured home, designed for residential occu-
              pancy, but not a house trailer or recreational vehicle.

       93.    Dwelling Unit: A building or portion thereof providing living and sleeping space as well as
              sanitary, bathing, and food preparation facilities for one household, but not a trailer house or
              other recreational vehicle.

       94.    Dwelling Unit, Attached: A dwelling unit which (1) shares one or more common or abutting
              wall, floor, or ceiling with one or more dwelling units and/or (2) has a shared roof structure
              with or a roof without a spatial gap between one or more dwelling units. The common or
              abutting walls, floors, ceilings, and roofs includes those of attached garages, storage areas, or
              other accessory uses. When a dwelling unit is attached only to an accessory dwelling unit and
              the accessory dwelling unit is not attached to any other dwelling unit, the dwelling unit is not
              "Attached" under this definition while the accessory dwelling unit is "Attached" under this
              definition.

       95.    Dwelling Unit, Detached: A Dwelling Unit not meeting the definition of Dwelling Unit,
              Attached.

       96.    Dwelling Unit, Multiple-Family: Multiple dwelling units located on a single lot where units
              are not an accessory dwelling unit and the dwelling units are not middle housing. Multiple-
              family dwelling units may be detached or attached.

       97.    Dwelling Unit, Single-Family: A single detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

       98.    Encroachment Area: See Section 4.139.00

       99.    Equipment Enclosures: A small structure, shelter, cabinet or vault used to house and protect
              the electronic equipment necessary for processing wireless communication signals. Associ-
              ated equipment may include air conditioning and emergency generators.

       100.  Essential Government Services. Services and facilities provided by a governmental unit, that
              are basis and inherent to the public health and welfare including, but not limited to, fire,
              police, water, sewer, transportation, emergency communication, and education, and govern-
              mental services and facilities in support thereof.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:15
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       101.  Exempt tree or vegetation: As used in the solar access provisions of this Code, the terms
              "exempt tree or exempt vegetation" refer to the full height and breadth of vegetation that has
              been identified by the City as "solar friendly," and any vegetation listed as exempt on a plat,
              a document recorded with the plat, or a solar access permit.
       102.  Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park subdivision
              for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
              homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construc-
              tion of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
              before the effective date of the adopted floodplain management regulations.
       103.  Exterior Display: The outdoor exhibit of merchandise by a retail merchant.
       104.  Façade. The exterior wall or elevation of a building.

       105.  Feasible: Able to be accomplished, considering all aspects of preservation and proposed site
              development, including the cost of mitigation and relocation.
       106.  Fill: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, structures or any similar material is
              deposited, erected, placed, pulled or transported, including the conditions resulting there-
              from, whether within the limits of the l00-year flood plain or not.
       107.  Final Development Plan: A plan that includes a final map and other writing containing all the
              descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a
              land development, in the form required by Section 4.125(.18).
       108.  Flag Lot: A flag-shaped lot located behind another lot where the frontage on the street is only
              wide enough for its vehicular and pedestrian access; often found at the end of a street or
              adjacent to the outside corner of an L-shaped block.
       109.  Flood or Flooding: General and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
              normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters, and/or the unusual and rapid
              accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

       110.  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map prepared for the City of Wilsonville on
              which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the flood plain and the risk
              premium zones applicable to the community.
       111.  Flood Insurance Study: The official report prepared for the City of Wilsonville by the Federal
              Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map,
              and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

       112.  Flood Plain: Flood-prone areas as identified on the FIRM.
       113.  l00-Year Flood Plain: Land adjacent to a floodway that has a one percent chance of flooding
              in any given year, and as identified within the "A" zones of the FIRM.

       114.  Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
              be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
              surface elevation more than one foot.

       115.  Floodway Fringe: That portion of the flood plain not contained in the floodway.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:16
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.001

      116.  Floor Area: The area of the building, exclusive of porches and exterior stairs which shall
             extend to the exterior faces of all walls. Floor area shall include all levels within a structure,
             including mezzanines and additional stories above the first floor. Within a residential
             structure, floor area does not include garages or carports.
      117.  Foot Candle. The unit of density of luminous flux (lumens) incident at a point on a surface
             having an area of one square foot.
      118.  Frog Pond West Neighborhood: The geographic area covered by the Frog Pond West Master
             Plan. The area is bounded on the south by SW Boeckman Road, on the west by Boeckman
             Creek, on the north by a line extending directly west from the intersection of SW Stafford
             Road and SW Kahle Road, and on the east by SW Stafford Road.
      119.  Frog Pond East Neighborhood: The portion of the geographic area covered by the Frog Pond
             East and South Master Plan north of SW Advance Road. The area is bounded on the south
             by SW Advance Road, on the west by SW Stafford Road, on the north by east-west portion
             SW Kahle Road and a line extending directly east from the point where SW Kahle road turns
             to the north, and on the east by the eastern boundary of the Urban Growth Boundary
             established by Metro Ordinance No. 18-1427.
      120.  Frog Pond South Neighborhood: The portion of the geographic area covered by the Frog
             Pond East and South Master Plan south of SW Advance Road, including park land owned
             by the City of Wilsonville south of Advance Road between SW 63rd Avenue and SW 60th
             Avenue and Meridian Creek Middle School and surrounding land owned by the West
             Linn-Wilsonville School District. The area is bounded on the north by SW Advance Road,
             on the west by a line extending directly south of the intersection of SW Stafford Road and
             SW Advance Road, excluding land that is part of the 1995 Landover Subdivision Plat, on the
             south by SW Kruse Road east of SW 60th Avenue and west of SW 60th Avenue by an
             east-west property line approximately 314 feet south of SW Kruse Road, and on the east by
             property lines paralleling SW 60th Avenue approximately 863 feet to the east (also, the
             southern and eastern boundaries of the Urban Growth Boundary established by Metro
             Ordinance No. 18-1427).
      121.  Front lot line: For purposes of the solar access regulations, a lot line abutting a street. For
             corner lots the front lot line is that with the narrowest frontage. When the lot line abutting a
             street is curved, the front lot line is the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve.
             For a flag lot, the front lot line is the shortest lot line adjoining the pole portion of the lot,
             excluding the unbuildable portion of the pole (see Figure 2: Front Line Lot in Section 4.137).
      122.  Garage: Enclosure for storage with sufficient space and access to store a vehicle. May be
             detached from other structures, attached, or portion of a structure.

      123.  Glare. Light that causes visual discomfort or disability, and the wattage and/or light distri-
             bution is excessive for the purposes for which the illumination is necessary.
      124.  Grocery Store: A retail business that sells food and household sundries.
      125.  Grocery Store, Specialty: A retail business that sells specialty food and specialty household
             sundries.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:17
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       126.  Habitable floor: Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping,
              eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage
              purposes is not a "habitable floor".

       127.  Habitable floor area: For the purpose of calculating the area of a dwelling unit, the area of a
              dwelling unit usable for living purposes, which includes areas for sleeping, eating, cooking,
              bathing, sanitation, recreation., and similar activities. Storage areas with floor-level interior
              access from other habitable areas are included in habitable floor area. Storage areas without
              interior floor-level access from other habitable areas are not included in habitable floor area.
              A garage is not considered a storage area for the purpose of this definition and is not
              considered part of the habitable floor area.

       128.  Habitat-Friendly Development: A method of developing property that protects our natural
              resources as we grow and focuses on land development and site design that mimic natural
              processes. Examples include clustering development to avoid habitat, minimizing tree re-
              moval and root disturbance, managing storm water on-site to help filter rainwater and
              recharge groundwater sources, and, where feasible, reducing the amount of  impervious
              surface created by development.

       129.  Hardscape. Permanent improvements to a site, including but not limited to, parking lots,
              driveways, streets, plazas, sidewalks, walkways, bikeways, abutments, stairs, ramps, and
              architectural features, such as fountains and sculptures.

       130.  Hearing Body: The City Council, the Development Review Board, or the Planning Commis-
              sion having the authority to review an application assigned by Section 4.031, Section 4.032,
              and Section 4.033.

       131.  Heritage Tree: A tree that, due to age, size, species, quality or historic association, is
              considered of landmark importance to the community and has been designated as such by
              the City Council.

       132.  Home Business: A business operating from a dwelling unit that does not meet the definition
              of a "Home Occupation" listed below. Short-term rental of a dwelling unit or portion thereof
              where the operator does not live on the same lot is a home business. A home business requires
              a conditional use permit.

       133.  Home Occupation: An occupation, profession, or craft, which is customarily incidental to or
              carried on in a dwelling unit or premises and not one in which the use of the premises as a
              dwelling unit is largely incidental to the business use. A home occupation is carried on by a
              member of the household residing within the dwelling unit. A home occupation shall require
              no structural alteration or changes to the exterior of the dwelling unit, and shall include no
              display of merchandise on the premises which can be seen from the exterior of the dwelling
              unit. Any instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time. Noise, odor, smoke, gases, fallout,
              vibration, heat or glare resulting from the use shall not be of the intensity as to be detected
              outside of the containing structure. Traffic and parking are to be such as to give no outward

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:18
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

              appearance that a business is being conducted on the premise. Short-term rental of a dwelling
              unit or portion thereof where the operator of the short-term rental lives on the same lot is a
              home occupation.

       134.  Hospital: A building or premises providing in-patient services that is used for human medical
              or surgical treatment.

       135.  Hospital, Animal: A building or premises for the medical or surgical treatment of domestic
              animals or pets, including dog, cat and veterinary hospitals.

       136.  Hotel, Motel, or Overnight Lodging Facility: A building which is designed or used to offer six
              or more rooms for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation.

       137.  Household. A group of individuals comprising a single house-keeping unit sharing such
              facilities as bathrooms and kitchens. No more than five unrelated individuals paying rent or
              otherwise having financial obligations towards the dwelling unit may comprise a single
              household. Every group of five, or portion thereof, shall be considered a separate household..
              For housing developed to implement ORS 426.508 or under the Fair Housing Amendments
              Act of  1988, household shall mean all persons living in a dwelling unit, regardless of
              relationship.

       138.  House Side Shield. For fully shielded luminaires only, an internal shield designed and
              installed by the luminaire manufacturer that significantly attenuates candlepower in the back
              photometric hemisphere at all angles greater than 30 degrees relative to nadir.

       139.  Human Occupancy: For purposes of Section 4.172(.02)(C.)(4.), any structure usable for living
              purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination
              thereof, is considered to be for human occupancy. A structure used only for storage purposes
              is not for "human occupancy."

       140.  IESNA. The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (see www.iesna.com).

       141.  Impact Area: See Section 4.139.00

       142.  Impervious Area: An area with minimal infiltration of surface water into the underlying soil
              and shall include pavement (including but not limited to concrete or asphaltic concrete
              surfaces), gravel roads, structures, roadways, and roofs.

       143.  Intensification of Use: Within the Willamette River Greenway means any additions which
              increase or expand the area or amount of an existing use, or the level of activity. Remodeling
              of the exterior of a structure not excluded below is an intensification when it will substan-
              tially alter the appearance of the structure. Maintenance and repair usual and necessary for
              the continuance of an existing use is not an intensification of use. Reasonable emergency
              procedures necessary for the safety or the protection of property are not an intensification of
              use. Residential use of  land within the Greenway includes the practices and activities
              customarily related to the use and enjoyment of one's home. Landscaping, construction of
              driveways, modification of existing structures or construction or placement of such subsid-
              iary structures or facilities, including accessory dwelling units, adjacent to the residence as are

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:19
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              usual and necessary to such use and enjoyment shall not be considered an intensification for
              the purposes of this Code. Seasonal increases in gravel operations shall not be considered an
              intensification of use.
       144.  Kennel: Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, more than four months of age, are
              kept for boarding, breeding or sales.

       145.  Landscaping: The term "landscaping" includes trees, grass, shrubs, flowers, water features,
              and garden areas, and the arrangement of paths, walkways, fountains, patios, decks, fencing,
              street furniture and ornamental concrete or stonework areas, earth forms such as grading,
              mounding and contours. The use of  pervious materials is encouraged. Both native and
              non-native vegetation may constitute landscaping materials. This definition pertains to
              complete site modifications rather than just buildings.
       146.  Landscape Lighting. Luminaires attached to structures, mounted on poles or otherwise, or at
              grade (luminaire not to exceed three feet above grade) and used solely for landscape rather
              than area lighting.

       147.  Legislative process: A process that leads to the adoption of rules or policies that have broad
              implications for a large geographic area or for the community overall.

       148.  Light Manufacturing: Low- to moderate-impact industrial, manufacturing, processing, and
              assembly uses that exhibit benign external characteristics compatible with the character and
              overall design of a Residential Village environment.
       149.  Light Source (or Lamp): The actual bulb or lamp that emits the light.

       150.  Light Trespass. Spill light that because of quantitative, directional, or spectral content causes
              light level at the property line that is greater than as provided on Table 4 of this Code.
       151.  Lighting Master Plan: A plan that indicates the criteria for, and general location of exterior
              lighting within the Village zone. See also Community Elements Book.

       152.  Lighting System. One or more luminaires, together with associated wires, conduits and poles
              that constitute the illumination system on the parcel.

       153.  Lighting Zones. Specific allowances and limitations for lighting systems and fixtures as
              specified in this Ordinance.
       154.  Live-Work Dwelling Unit (LWDU): A dwelling unit where (1) the ground-level front façade
              has a commercial-type store front determined by having at least 60 percent glazing and a
              permanent architectural cover over the entry (2) the interior along the building frontage is
              designed for workspace and no kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, closet, or storage is adjacent to
              the front façade and (3) all or a portion of the dwelling unit meets the commercial building
              code to support an accessory commercial or light industrial use. This is differentiated from a
              home occupation or home business in that the dwelling unit is specifically designed to
              accommodate a commercial or light industrial use, whereas a home occupation or home
              business takes place in a residential structure without such specific design. This is differenti-
              ated from a Business-Integrated Dwelling Unit in that in a Live-Work Dwelling Unit the
              residential and commercial uses are not required to be fully divided physically.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:20
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.001

       155.  Lot: A unit of land owned by or under the lawful control and in the lawful possession of one
              distinct ownership, or separated from other land by a drawing on a recorded subdivision or
              partition plat. However, does not include a unit of land created through a middle housing
              land division.
       156.  Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding the driveway
              portion of a flag lot.

       157.  Lot, Corner: A lot either (1) where two intersecting lot lines each abut a street or private drive
              or (2) where the shortest lot line abuts a tract with a non-vehicular pathway and an
              intersecting lot line abuts a street or private drive. Private drives which are bounded on two
              opposite sides by a single lot shall not be considered in determining if a lot is a corner lot.
       158.  Lot Coverage: The area of a lot covered by buildings on that lot, expressed as a percentage of
              the total lot area.

       159.  Lot Depth: The lot depth is the mean average distance between the front lot line and rear lot
              line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
       160.  Lot, Key: A lot, the side line of which abuts the rear line of one or more adjoining lots.
       161.  Lot Line, Front: Except for Corner Lots and Through Lots, the boundary line of a lot
              abutting a street or private drive. If no boundary lines of a lot abut a street or private drive,
              but do abut a tract with a non-vehicular pathway with vehicle access to the lot provided via
              an alley, then the boundary line abutting the tract with a pathway is the Front Lot Line. In the
              case of a Corner Lot, the shortest lot line along a tract with a pathway, street, or private drive
              is the front lot line. In the case of a Through Lot, the narrowest boundary line abutting a
              street or private drive, and if multiple boundary lines abutting a street or private drive are of
              the same length, the boundary line on the lower classification street, and if both of equal
              length and on the same street classification, the boundary line indicated as the front on a final
              plat. A private drive bounded on two sides by a single lot shall not be considered in
              determining lot lines.

       162.  Lot Line, Rear: Any boundary line opposite and most distant from a front line and not
              intersecting a front lot line, except in the case of a corner lot.
       163.  Lot Line, Side: Any boundary line not a front or rear lot line.

       164.  Lot, Through: A lot where multiple non-intersecting lot lines abut a street, other than a
              freeway, or private drive. Private drives which are bounded on two sides by a single lot shall
              not be considered in determining if a lot is a through lot.
       165.  Lot, Width: The 'lot width' is the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
              measured within the lot boundaries.

       166.  Lowest floor: Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
              unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
              or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
              provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
              applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:21
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       167.  Lumen. The unit of luminous flux: a measure of the amount of light emitted by a lamp.

       168.  Luminaire (or "Light Fixture"). A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more electric
              lamps, the lamp holder, reflector, lens, ballast, and/or other components and accessories.
       169.  Luminance. The amount of light emitted in a given direction from a surface by the light
              source or by reflection from a surface. The unit is candela per square meter.

       170.  Luminous Flux. A measure of the total light output from a source, the unit being the lumen.

       171.  Major Alteration: Any change, enlargement or modification to existing site improvements or
              structures, or use thereof  or any which substantially alters the exterior appearance or
              function of the site or building or increases the previous floor area by an amount equal to or
              greater than one-third.

       172.  Major Transit Stop: Transit stops that are located where two or more existing or planned
              routes intersect or where there are existing or planned transfer locations between transit
              systems, Park & Ride lots, and shopping centers and other major destinations.

       173.  Major Transit Street: A primary corridor for transit, receiving half-hour or better service
              during peak traffic hours. Typically, these streets are also arterials or major collectors.

       174.  Manufactured Dwelling: Includes residential trailer, mobile home, mobile house, trailer and
              manufactured home. This definition does not include any building or structure subject to the
              structural specialty code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 to 455.450 or any unit identified
              as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

       175.  Manufactured Home: A structure built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or
              without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities, for movement on the
              public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for
              human occupancy, and was constructed in accordance with Federal Manufactured Housing
              Construction and Safety Standards regulations in effect at the time of construction. For
              flood plain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park
              trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180
              consecutive days. For flood insurance purposes, and City zoning standards, the term "man-
              ufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.

       176.  Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Park: Means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
              divided into two or more spaces that are rented or leased for the placement of manufactured
              or mobile homes.

       177.  Manufactured Home or Mobile Home Subdivision: Means a group of three or more separate
              lots intended for the location of manufactured or mobile homes, and which lots may be
              rented or sold.

       178.  Master Plan: A plan with a series of detailed components covering one or more distinct
              areas.
              •        See Villebois Village Master Plan.
              •        See Coffee Creek Design Overlay District.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:22
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.001

      179.  Master Planner: A professional team selected by the City of Wilsonville and the State of
             Oregon in accordance with ORS 426.508 to master plan the area prescribed in DATELUP.

      180.  Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan: A plan that describes the design principles and
             standards of public and private signage and wayfinding elements within the Village zone.

      181.  Middle Housing: A class of dwelling units comprising duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, cluster
             housing (including cottage clusters), and townhouses.

      182.  Middle Housing, Higher: All middle housing dwelling units besides duplexes and Two-Unit
             Cluster Housing.

      183.  Middle Housing Land Division: The replat of a lot to create separate units of land for each
             dwelling unit in a Middle Housing development that could otherwise be built on the lot
             without a land division or to create a separate unit of land for an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
             Following the land division, the units of  land resulting from a Middle Housing Land
             Division shall collectively be considered a single lot along with the parent lot for all but
             platting and property transfer purposes under City code and state rules and statutes,
             including, but not limited to, the following purposes:
             •        Lot standards such as size, setback, lot coverage, and lot width and depth;
             •        Definition of unit types (e.g., a Two-Unit Cluster Housing development where each
                    unit is on its own lot through a Middle Housing Land Division would still be
                    considered Two-Unit Cluster Housing rather than single-family units; a duplex would
                    still be considered a duplex rather than townhouses);

             •        Allowance of number of Middle Housing units and Accessory Dwelling Units;
             •        Compliance with Middle Housing rules and statutes in ORS 197 and OAR 660-046.

      184.  Middle Housing Land Division Unit: A unit of land resulting from a Middle Housing Land
             Division. Not considered a lot except for platting and property transfer purposes. Each
             Middle Housing Land Division Unit is considered part of a parent lot and are not further
             divisible. Each Middle Housing Land Division Unit has one dwelling unit.

      185.  Mixed Solid Waste: Solid Waste that contains recoverable or recyclable materials and
             materials that are not capable of being recycled or recovered for further use. Mixed Use: A
             development in which a site or building provides more than one type of  use, such as
             commercial and residential

      186.  Mobile Home: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has
             sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, and that
             was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction
             requirements of the Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

      187.  Mobility-Ready Unit: A dwelling unit with living and sleeping space as well as sanitary,
             bathing, and food preparation facilities on one level and that level is accessible from a parking
             space or public sidewalk without the use of stairs or with up to two stairs with space to add
             a wheelchair accessible ramp.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:23
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       188.  Modular Home: A structure intended for residential use that has sleeping, cooking and
              plumbing facilities and is constructed off-site in compliance with the Uniform Building Code
              (Oregon State Structural Specialty Code) and designed to be transported to a site for
              installation and/or assembly of modular components to form a permanent structure.

       189.  Mounting Height. The vertical distance between the lowest part of the luminaire and the
              ground surface directly below the luminaire.
       190.  Multiuse Pathway or Path: A path that is separate from the roadway either in the roadway
              right-of-way or in an independent right-of-way. It is designed and constructed to allow for
              safe walking, biking, and other human-powered travel modes.

       191.  Multi-family housing. Buildings or structures that contain three or more dwelling units used,
              intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or that
              are occupied for living purposes, apartment houses, condominiums, congregate residences,
              townhouses and similar non-transient dwellings.

       192.  Native: As applied to any tree or plant, this term means indigenous to the northern
              Willamette Valley.
       193.  Neighborhood: An urban sector of  residential or multiple uses served by a network of
              pedestrian-friendly streets and alleys within approximately ¼ mile in radius. Neighborhoods
              are generally defined by arterial or collector streets and/or open space at their edges and
              include a Neighborhood Commons or park or civic use at or near their center.

       194.  Nadir. The downward direction; exactly vertical, directly below a luminaire.

       195.  Neighborhood Center: An area of mixed-use buildings at or near the center of a neighbor-
              hood, providing nearby residents with convenient access to goods and services.
       196.  Neighborhood Commons: A site within a neighborhood, for use by local residents, which may
              include a transit shelter and waiting place for transit riders, and public space, providing a
              social gathering place.

       197.  Neighborhood Commercial: A planned development commercial center or complex of com-
              mercial uses to provide for the daily convenience, goods and services of nearby residential
              areas. Typical uses include grocery, hardware, and drug stores; barber and beauty stores;
              banks; laundry and dry cleaning; and professional offices, but exclude service stations.
       198.  New Construction: For purposes of flood plain management, structures for which the "start
              of construction" commenced on or after June 17, 2008.

       199.  New Facility: The installation of a new transmission tower. New attachments are not new
              facilities.

       200.  Non-Conforming Lot: A legally created lot or parcel that does not conform in terms of area,
              width, depth, or other dimensions with the standards of the zone in which it is located.

       201.  Non-Conforming Site Conditions: A legally established site that does not conform with the
              landscaping, parking or other site development standards of the zone in which it is located.
              A site may be rendered non-conforming to development standards through a change in

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:24
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.001

              zoning requirements or through the acquisition of some portion of the property by a public
              agency. For purposes of this Code, a site for which Stage II Planned Development approval
              has been granted by the City, and which approval remains in effect, shall not be deemed
              non-conforming, except as provided in Subsection 4.140(.10)C.

       202.  Non-Conforming Structure: A legally established building or other structure that does not
              conform with the height, setback, area, lot coverage, or other standards for structures of the
              zone in which it is located. A structure may be rendered non-conforming through a change in
              zoning requirements or through the acquisition of some portion of the property by a public
              agency. For purposes of this Code, a structure for which Stage II Planned Development
              approval has been granted by the City, and which approval remains in effect, shall not be
              deemed non-conforming, except as provided in Subsection 4.140(.10)C.

       203.  Non-Conforming Use: A legally established use, which was established prior to the adoption
              of the zoning use requirements for the site with which it does not conform. For purposes of
              this Code, a use for which or Stage II Planned Development approval has been granted by the
              City, and which approval remains in effect, shall not be deemed non-conforming, except as
              provided in Subsection 4.140(.10)C.

       204.  Northern lot line: The lot line that is the smallest angle from a line drawn east-west and
              intersecting the northernmost point of the lot, excluding the pole portion of a flag lot. If the
              north line adjoins an undevelopable area other than a required yard area, the northern lot line
              shall be at the northern edge of such undevelopable area. If two lot lines have an identical
              angle relative to a line drawn east-west, or if the northern lot lines is less than 35 feet, then the
              northern lot line shall be a line 35 feet in length within the lot parallel with and at a maximum
              distance from the front lot line (see Figure 3: Northern Lot Line in Section 4.137).

       205   North-south dimension: The length of a line beginning at the mid-point of the northern lot
              line and extending in a southerly direction perpendicular to the northern lot line until it
              reaches a property boundary (see Figure 4: North-South Dimension of the Lot in Section
              4.137).

       206.  Office: A use category designating buildings commonly used as a workplace for professional
              or government functions.

       207.  Office Complex: A planned development commercial center or complex of administrative,
              professional and general office uses. Typical uses include governmental, financial, architec-
              tural, medical, dental, legal, real estate, accounting, insurance and general business offices.

       208.  Obtrusive Light. Glare and light trespass.

       209.  Office  Complex—Technology.   Applies  to  office  uses  in  an  industrial,  typically  high-
              technology, setting, including research and development, software or hardware development,
              telecommunication or data manipulation operations.

              Typically in an industrial campus setting, Technology-Office Complexes are expected to
              generate less traffic than general office uses.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:25
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              Technology-Office Complex is not intended to apply to general office uses such as medical
              offices, real estate sales offices, or similar operations that are more appropriately the predom-
              inate uses in non-industrial areas.

       210.  Official Map: The map established by the City Council on which the plan locations,
              particularly of streets, are indicated with detail and exactness so as to furnish the basis for
              property acquisition, building restrictions, building permits, zoning or other uses, the origi-
              nal of which is on file in the office of the City Recorder.

       211.  Open Space: Land that is not covered by buildings, paving, or other hard surfaces, unless
              such hard surfaces are part of an approved landscape plan.

       212.  Open Space Area: A specific measurement. See Section 4.125(.08), Open Space.

       213.  Usable Open Space: Open Space that serves a planned recreational, active transportation,
              environmental education or relaxation purpose and is of sufficient size and shape for the
              intended purpose. Usable open space does not include land that is an apparently remnant
              tract or otherwise unusable or oddly shaped area.

       214.  Ornamentation: The details of shape, texture, and color that are deliberately added to a
              structure for decorative effect.

       215.  Outdoor Dining Area: A space designated for commercial dining, partially bounded by
              building walls, screening or property lines, but open to the sky, and open on at least one side
              to a street or public space.

       216.  Outdoor Living Area: Outdoor recreational area intended for the use of the residents of the
              development. In order to be considered "outdoor living area" it must be usable and accessible
              by the residents of the development.

       217.  Ornamental or Accent Lighting. Outdoor lighting that is installed mainly or entirely for its
              decorative effect or to accent an object or a feature, rather than as an aid to visibility.

       218.  Parcel: (1) A unit of  land resulting from a partition and (2) Within the Coffee Creek
              Industrial Design Overlay District, areas bounded by addressing streets, supporting streets
              and/or through connections are defined as a parcel.

       219.  Parking Facility, Commercial: A surface lot or parking structure that is operated as a business
              and is not integral to a specific use or uses within Villebois.

       220.  Parking Space: A permanently surfaced and marked area not less than nine feet wide and 18
              feet long, excluding paved area necessary for access, for the parking of a motor vehicle.

       221.  Parking Space, Accessible: A permanently surfaced and marked area meeting the standards
              established by ORS 447.233. Such spaces shall be appropriately reserved and signed for use
              by the disabled and shall be subject to any additional standards of the Americans with
              Disabilities Act (ADA) or other applicable provisions of local, state or federal law.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:26
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.001

       222.  Parking Space, Compact: A permanently surfaced and marked area not less than seven feet,
              six inches wide and 15 feet long, excluding paved area necessary for access, for the parking of
              a compact motor vehicle. In order to be considered a compact parking space, it must be
              clearly labeled as such.

       223.  Parking Space, Handicapped: Be designed for safe and convenient access that meets ADA
              and ODOT standards. All parking areas which contain ten or more parking spaces, shall for
              every 50 standard spaces, provide one ADA-accessible parking space that is constructed to
              building code standards, Wilsonville Code 9.000.

       224.  Parking Space, Motorcycle: A permanently surfaced and marked area not less than four feet
              wide and eight feet long, excluding paved area necessary for access, for the parking of a
              compact motor vehicle. In order to be considered a motorcycle parking space, it must be
              clearly labeled as such.

       225.  Partition:
              A.     "Partition" means either an act of  partitioning land or an area or tract of  land
                     partitioned under the provisions of Section 4.200. As used in this Code, a land partition
                     may be either a "major" or "minor" partition, as those terms are commonly used.

              B.      "Partition land" means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels when
                     such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single
                     ownership. "Partition land" does not include divisions of  land resulting from lien
                     foreclosures, and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not
                     limited to court orders in proceedings involving testate or intestate succession; and
                     "partition land" does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a
                     common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing
                     parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot size
                     established by any applicable zoning ordinance.

       226.  Pathway: A pathway is a pedestrian facility that is entirely separate from the roadway and
              generally serves as an on-site pedestrian system for multi-family, commercial and industrial
              developments. The Americans with Disabilities Act defines a pathway as an "Exterior
              Accessible Route."

       227.  Pattern Book: An illustrative document that depicts the site development, landscaped design,
              and/ or architectural character of a proposed development.
              •        See Section 4.125.15, Pattern Book for projects in Villebois.

              •        See Section 4.134(.06) F, Pattern Book for projects in the Coffee Creek Design Overlay
                     District.

       228.  Pedestrian Access: A path of travel to approach and enter a building, or open space on foot.

       229.  Permit (Tree cutting): Approval to remove trees according to the following categories:

              A.     Type A—Permits removal of  one to three trees within a 12 month period on any
                     property.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:27
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              B.      Type B—Permits removal of four or more trees on any property (a) not subject to site
                     development review, or b) previously approved for site development, and is c) not in a
                     commercial woodlot.

              C.     Type C—Permits removal of trees on property under a site development application.

              D.     Type D—Permits removal of trees on a commercial woodlot.

       230.  Permit Grantee: Any person, including the person's successors-in-interest, whose application
              for a Permit has been approved, or who is acting on the permit grantee's behalf with the
              grantee's consent.

       231.  Person: Any individual or legal entity.

       232.  Phasing: To plan and then carry out development in stages over time. The length of time will
              be determined by several factors, including response to market conditions, availability and
              capacity of existing utilities and infrastructure, and timing of road improvement approval
              and funding.

       233.  Planning Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of Wilsonville established in
              Chapter 2 of the Wilsonville Code.

       234.  Planning Director: The Planning Director as established in Section 2.190 of the Wilsonville
              Code. As used in this Chapter, the term "Planning Director" also applies to other staff
              persons or consultants specifically assigned to act on behalf of the Planning Director.

       235.  Photometric Test Report. A report by an independent testing laboratory or one certified by
              the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) describing the candela distribu-
              tion, shielding type, luminance, and other characteristics of a specific luminaire.

       236.  Plat: A map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all of the descriptions,
              locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision,
              condominium division or land partition. A tentative plat is one that is prepared for review
              and consideration by the City. A final plat is one that is prepared for recordation with the
              County after the City has approved the tentative plat.

       237.  Plaza: A public space at the intersection of important streets, as illustrated and described in
              the Villebois Village Master Plan, for civic purposes and commercial activity.

       238.  Porch: An open-air room appended to the mass of a building, with floor and roof.

       239.  Pre-existing Towers and Pre-existing Antennae: Any tower or antennae for which a building
              permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

       240.  Preliminary Development Plan: A conceptual and quantitatively accurate representation of a
              defined area within an approved Specific Area Plan, in the form required by Section
              4.125(.18).

       241.  Premises: A site with or without buildings.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:28
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.001

       242.  Private Drive: A private way, other than an alley, that includes a roadway.

              A.     Private Access/Circulation Drive—Industrial/Commercial/Multi-family/Mixed Use:
                     A private drive in an industrial, commercial, multi-family (including mobile home
                     parks), or mixed-use development providing vehicular ingress and egress to the devel-
                     opment and/or internal circulation.
              B.      Residential Private Access Drive: A private drive in a non-multi-family residential
                     development providing primary vehicle access to no more than four lots on which
                     dwelling units can be developed. A residential private access drive provides for no
                     through vehicle access and is not extendable. This definition does not include private
                     alleys

              C.     Residential Private Drive—Pre-existing: A private drive in a non-multi-family residen-
                     tial development approved prior to (effective date of ordinance) including those that
                     provides vehicular access to more than four lots.

       243.  Private Way: A private area dedicated to circulation, including roadways, bikeways, paths, or
              utilities.

       244.  Professional—Type Services:  A "professional-type service" shall include activities such as
              those offered by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer, accountant, artist,
              teacher, real estate and insurance sales.

       245.  Protected solar building line: A line on a plat or map recorded with the plat that identifies the
              location on a lot where a point two feet above may not be shaded by structures or non-exempt
              trees (see Figure 11: Soar Lot Option 2: Protected Solar Building Line in Section 4.137).

       246.  Protected Outdoor Space: An outdoor space that is partially protected from direct exposure
              to the weather by a roof, building walls, and/or other enclosures.

       247.  Private Way: A private area dedicated to circulation, including the roadway for private
              streets, bikeways, paths or utilities.

       248.  Public-facing Façade. A building façade that faces a public or private street, public space, or
              public pedestrian connections (includes parks and open spaces with public pedestrian access)
              without an intervening building that blocks its view from the public area it faces.

       249.  Public Space: An area without buildings, reserved for public use, whether owned and
              maintained by a public or private organization, including but not limited to, plazas, parks,
              natural preserves, and trails.

       250.  Public Way: A public area dedicated to circulation, including the roadway or street, bike-
              ways, paths and public utilities.

       251.  Quadplex: Four attached dwelling units on a single lot.

       252.  Quasi-judicial process: A process that leads to a decision on a land use or development
              application involving a single property or small group of properties. (Please see the definition
              of Legislative Process, above.)

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:29
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       253.  Rainwater Management Program: Infrastructure and procedures for the collection, filtra-
              tion, and conveyance of rainwater.

       254.  Rainwater Management System: The physical components of the Rainwater Management
              Program.

       255.  Rainwater Path: The route of movement of rainwater from building roofs and paved surfaces
              to the Rainwater Management System.

       256.  Recreational Vehicle: Means a vehicle which is:

              A.     Built on a single chassis;

              B.      Four hundred square feet or less, when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

              C.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

              D.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
                     quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

       257.  Regulating Plan: A plan that organizes the system of existing and future streets and multi-use
              paths within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.

       258.  Religious Institution: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, such as a
              church, synagogue, temple or mosque, that is used for conducting organized religious
              services, including ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of
              beliefs.

       259.  Remove or Removal: The act of removing a tree by topping, digging up or cutting down,
              effecting removal through damage, or causing to be removed, transplanted or destroyed.

       260.  Replacement Area: the mitigation area required to compensate for an encroachment into the
              SROZ when allowed in accordance within Section 4.139.00

       261.  Research and Development: Commercial and non-profit establishments primarily engaged in
              performing laboratory or other physical or biological, primary, basic, or applied research,
              development and testing. Does not include Light Manufacturing.

       262.  Residential Facility: As used in ORS 197, a residential facility is a residential treatment or
              training facility, licensed by the State of Oregon, which provides care, treatment or training
              for six to 15 individuals, and which may also provide housing for staff persons who provide
              services to those individuals. For the purposes of this Code, unless inhabited by a single
              family, a residential facility is considered to be a form of multiple family residential develop-
              ment.

       263.  Residential Home: As used in ORS 197, a residential home is a residential treatment or
              training home, or adult foster home, licensed by the State of Oregon, which provides care,
              treatment or training for five or fewer individuals, and which may also provide housing for
              staff persons who provide services to those individuals. For the purposes of this Code, a
              residential home is considered to be a form of single-family dwelling unit.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:30
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

       264.  Residential Trailer: A structure constructed for movement on the public highways, that has
              sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, is being
              used for residential purposes and was constructed before January l, 1962.
       265.  Residential Village Comprehensive Plan Designation: The area within which the Village zone
              applies, as illustrated on the Comprehensive Plan Map.
       266.  Row House: In the Village Zone one of a series of houses, often of similar or identical design,
              situated side by side, and on their own lots. Within the Villebois Village Center Boundary, row
              houses may be attached or detached in accordance with the Village Center Architectural
              Standards. Attached row houses also meet the definition of townhouse. Detached row houses
              also meet the definition of single-family dwelling unit.
       267.  Right-of-way: The area between boundary lines of a public way.

       268.  Riparian Corridor: See Section 4.139.00.
       269.  Riparian Corridor Cross Sections: See Section 4.139.00.
       270.  Riparian Impact Area: See Section 4.139.00.
       271.  Road: Same as "Street".
       272.  Roadway: The portion of a public way or street or private way developed for use by vehicular
              traffic.

       273.  Roadway, Shared: a roadway that is designed to be shared by additional users besides motor
              vehicles, especially bicycles.
       274.  School: An educational facility.
       275.  School, Commercial: A school operated as a commercial enterprise. See Section 4.125(.04),
              Conditional Uses.
       276.  School, Private: Schools, including kindergartens, nurseries, children's or adult day care
              facilities, play schools, and other such facilities, operated primarily through private funding
              sources. See Section 4.125(.04), Conditional Uses.
       277.  School, Public: A school endowed and/or supported by taxation. See Section 4.125(.04),
              Conditional Uses.

       278.  Screening: Any construction whose essential function is to visually conceal, as in sight-
              obscuring fencing or sight-obscuring planting. See Section 4.176.

       279.  Setback: The distance between a reference line (usually a property line) and the nearest point
              of  a building, or portion thereof. In the Village Zone, see Section 4.125.06, Standards
              Applying to all Developments.
       280.  Service Center: A planned development commercial center or complex of uses related to
              serve the motoring public and located at or near the freeway interchanges. Typical uses
              include restaurants, motels, automobile and truck service stations and centers.
       281.  Shade point: The part of a structure or non-exempt tree that casts the longest shadow onto
              the adjacent northern lot(s) when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:31
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south; except a shadow caused by a narrow
              object such as a mast or whip antenna, a dish antenna with a diameter of three feet or less, a
              chimney, utility pole, or wire. The height of the shade point shall be measured from the shade
              point to either the average elevation at the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the
              front lot line. If the shade point is located at the northern end of a ridgeline of a structure
              oriented within 45 degrees of a true north-south line, the shade point height computed
              according to the preceding sentence may be reduced by three feet. If a structure has a roof
              oriented within 45 degrees of a true east-west line with a pitch that is flatter than five feet
              (vertical) in 12 feet (horizontal) the shade point will be the eave of the roof. If such a roof has
              a pitch that is five feet in 12 feet or steeper, the shade point will be the peak of the roof (see
              Figures 5: Height of the Shade Point of the Structure and Figure 6: Shade Point Height in
              Section 4.137).

       282.  Shade reduction line: A line drawn parallel to the northern lot line that intersects the shade
              point (see Figure 7: Shade Reduction Line in Section 4.137).

       283.  Shade: As used in the solar access provisions of this Code, a shadow cast by the shade point
              of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth
              ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south.

       284.  Shadow pattern: A graphic representation of an area that would be shaded by the shade point
              of a structure or vegetation when the sun in [is] at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth
              ranging between 22.7 degrees east and west of true south (see Figure 13: Shadow Pattern in
              Section 4.137).

       285.  Shielding.
              •       Directional. A luminaire designed to be aimed or pointed.

              •       Fully Shielded. A luminaire emitting no more than 0.5 percent of its luminous flux
                     above the horizontal plane, including any luminaire rated "full cut off" according to
                     IESNA RP-8-01.
              •       Partly Shielded. A luminaire emitting no more than ten percent of its total luminous
                     flux above the horizontal plane, including any luminaire rated "semi-cutoff" according
                     to IESNA RP-8-01.

              •       Shielded. A luminaire emitting no more than two percent of its total luminous flux
                     above the horizontal plane, including any luminaire rated "cutoff" according to IESNA
                     RP-8-01.
              •       Unshielded. A luminaire that may emit its flux in any direction.

       286.  Short-Term Rental: A dwelling unit or portion thereof  subject to a lease term, rental
              agreement, or similar agreement, either directly or through a professional vacation rental-
              company or similar, less than monthly, generally daily or weekly. Involves rental to only one
              party at a time. A dwelling unit with rental of different rooms during the same period to
              different parties is not considered a short-term rental, but may meet the definition of a bed
              and breakfast home or boarding house or hotel, motel, or overnight lodging facility.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:32
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.001

       287.  Sidewalk: A walkway, within or adjacent to a street right-of-way, paved to City standards.

       288.  Sight-Obscuring Planting: A dense perennial evergreen planting with sufficient foliage to
              obscure vision as specified in Section 4.176 and which will reach a height of at least six feet
              within 30 months after planting.

       289.  Sign: A device or display used or intended to be used for advertising purposes or used or
              intended to be used to inform or attract the attention of the public. "Sign" includes, where
              applicable, the structure, display surface, or other component parts of the device or display.
              Examples include, but are not limited to, advertising sign, banner, outdoor advertising sign,
              on-premises sign, temporary sign, window sign, message, light (other than a device used
              primarily to illuminate a building and/or premise), emblem, figure, painting, mural, drawing,
              placard, or poster. The display of merchandise that is offered on the premises shall not be
              considered to be a sign unless it is attached to any exterior surface or structure of the building
              including, but not limited to, roofs, walls, marquees, monuments, or poles. The scope of the
              term "sign" does not depend on the content of the message or image conveyed. A sign does
              not include architectural or landscape features that may attract attention but do not convey
              a message or image considered speech, or trademark, protected under federal or state law.
              A.     Addressing Signs: Signs indicating, at a minimum, the numerical address of  the
                     building.
              B.      Baseline: The invisible line on which text or other characters sit, the bottom extent of
                     the cap height of a typeface.
              C.     Bowl: In a font or typeface, an open or closed circular line that creates an interior space,
                     such as in the letters "d" and "c."
              D.     Cap Height: In a font or typeface, the distance from the baseline to the top of uppercase
                     letters like "H" and "J."
              E.     Changing image sign. Any sign which, through the use of moving structural elements,
                     flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, prisms, or other method, results in
                     movement, the appearance of  movement, or change of  sign image or text except
                     changeable copy signs defined below.

              F.      Changeable copy sign. Any sign, digital or manual, which is designed to have the copy
                     changed routinely and where the frequency of copy change does not exceed once every
                     15 minutes, except in emergency situations as requested by the City Manager or
                     designee.
              G.     Descender: In a font or typeface, the part of a letter extending below the baseline
                     including lower portion of the lowercase letters "g," "j," "p," "q," and "y."

              H.     Directional signs: Signs on private property that provide directions for the traveling
                     public and are deemed necessary for the safe traverse of the public.
              I.      Flashing Sign: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained
                     stationary or constant in intensity or color at all times when such sign is in use. For the
                     purpose of this Code, any moving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:33
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              J.       Freestanding Sign: A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding frame, mast, or
                     pole not attached to any building, and not including ground-mounted signs.
              K.     Ground-mounted Sign: A non-temporary sign which extends from the ground, or has
                     support which places the bottom of  the sign less than two feet from the ground,
                     including monument signs.
              L.     Inflatable Sign: Any device that depends on a differential between internal and external
                     air pressure to maintain its size, form or shape regardless of whether it is tied, tethered,
                     mounted or connected to a pole, building, or ground.
              M.    Institutional Signs: Signs that identify public buildings, churches, public and private
                     schools and other such structures used for public gathering or to serve the general
                     public. The Planning Director shall determine the nature of such signs if there is a
                     question. Institutional signage shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code.
              N.     Integral Sign: A sign carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze,
                     aluminum or other permanent type construction indicating names of buildings, date of
                     erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when made an
                     integral part of the structures.
              O.     Lawn Sign. A temporary freestanding sign commonly made of corrugated plastic,
                     greyboard, or similar type of material, constructed and maintained to prevent being
                     moved or heavily damaged by typical exposure to natural elements. Lawn signs in the
                     rights-of-way under W.C. 4.156.10 may be constructed to be portable.
              P.      Marquee Sign: A canopy or covering structure bearing a signboard or graphics
                     projecting from, and attached to, a building.
              Q.     Permanent Sign: Any sign that does not meet the definition of a temporary sign, below.
              R.     Portable Sign: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the
                     ground; a sign designed to be moved from place to place. These signs include, but are
                     not limited to movable A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, signs on vehicles or
                     trailers, and signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and
                     movable, including trailer reader boards.
              S.      Projecting Sign: A sign, other than a wall sign which projects from and is supported by
                     a wall of a building or structure. Projecting Signs are differentiated from Wall Flat
                     Signs as defined below.
                     1.      Blade Sign: A sign hanging, perpendicular to a building façade, from a canopy,
                            building projection, or mounting bracket intended to aid pedestrians in wayfind-
                            ing.
              T.      Rigid Sign: A temporary freestanding sign designed and constructed with materials of
                     a grade and quality to withstand strong winds, rains, and harsh weather conditions, and
                     maintained as a potentially year-long temporary sign to ensure that degradation or
                     weathering does not present aesthetic and public safety concerns and the sign retains
                     substantially the same quality throughout the year. Such signs may not be constructed
                     of cardboard, poster board, or other similar lightweight paper products.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:34
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.001

              U.     Roof Sign: A sign located on or above the roof of any building, not including a false
                     mansard roof, canopy or other fascia.

              V.      Selling Slogans: A brief striking phrase used in advertising or promotion. The hours of
                     operation of a business shall be considered to be a selling slogan.
              W.     Serif: In fonts and typefaces, the extra stroke at the end of a letter or character.

              X.     Shoulder: In fonts and typefaces, the curve at the beginning of a leg of a character such
                     as the upper curved portion of the lowercase letters "m" and "n."

              Y.      Sign Area: The display surface or face of the sign calculated as prescribed in Section
                     4.156.04
              Z.     Temporary Sign: A sign not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground,
                     intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.

              AA.  Video Sign: Moving visual messages projected on any surface.

              BB.   Wall Flat Sign: A sign affixed directly to or painted on or otherwise inscribed on an
                     exterior wall and confined within the limits of any building and which projects from
                     that surface not more than 12 inches at all points.
              CC.  Wayfinding Sign: The term way finding sign has two different contextual meanings.
                     First, it is used as a general description of one of the basic purposes or functions of
                     signs, which is to assist in directing the general public to specific destinations within the
                     community, so that they find their way. In this context almost all signs provide some
                     degree of way finding information. Second, the term is used to describe a specific type
                     of sign, such as local directional signs and district wayfinding signs, that provides
                     specific identity and/or direction to particular businesses, facilities, or places of inter-
                     est, such as parks, tourist attractions, public buildings, schools, special districts, or
                     other locations to which the public commonly asks for directions.

       290.  Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR): See Section 4.139.00

       291.  Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SROZ): See Section 4.139.00

       292.  Site Area, Net: The area of a development site, excepting all areas in streets or private drives,
              driveways, and parking spaces.

       293.  Site Development: Any human-caused change to improved or unimproved property, includ-
              ing, but not limited to, land surface mining, grading, filling, excavation, tree cutting, clearing,
              construction, installation or alteration of a building or other structure, establishment or
              termination of an access or outdoor storage on the land.

       294.  Solar access height limit: A series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted
              height for non-exempt vegetation on lots affected by a Solar Access Permit (see Figure 12:
              Solar Access Height Limit in Section 4.137).

       295.  Solar access permit: A document issued by the city that describes the maximum height that
              non-exempt vegetation is allowed to grow on lots to which a solar access permit applies.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:35
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       296.  Solar feature: A device or combination of devices or elements that does or will use direct
              sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling of a structure, heating
              or pumping of water, and generating electricity. Examples of a solar feature include a window
              or windows that contain(s) at least 20 square feet of glazing oriented within 45 degrees east
              and west of true south, a solar greenhouse, or a solar hot water heater. A solar feature may be
              used for purposes in addition to collecting solar energy, including but not limited to serving
              as a structural member or part of a roof, wall, or window. A south-facing wall without
              windows and without other features that use solar energy is not a solar feature for purposes
              of this Section.
       297.  Solar gain line: A line parallel to the northern property line(s) of the lot(s) south of and
              adjoining a given lot, including lots separated only by a street, that intersects the solar feature
              on that lot (see Figure 8: Solar Gain Line in Section 4.137).

       298.  Source Separated Recyclables: Recyclable materials designated "principle recyclable materi-
              als" by the Oregon Environmental Quality Commission under ORS 495A.025 with the
              exception of yard debris, as well as other source-separated recyclables that may be designated
              by local ordinance or regulation.

       299.  South or South facing: True south, or 20 degrees east of magnetic south.

       300.  Special Flood Hazard Area: Means an area having special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow),
              and/or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, AE,
              AH, VE, or V.

       301.  Specific Area Plan (SAP): A plan with a series of detailed components covering one of the
              five distinct areas of the Villebois Village Master Plan. These plans provide a higher level of
              analysis and detail than the Villebois Village Master Plan.
       302.  Stacked Flats: Two or more single-level dwelling units, the second arranged above the first,
              etc.

       303.  Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
              permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, place-
              ment or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
              either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
              pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
              beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
              Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
              filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the
              installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
              dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
              start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
              part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
              building.

       304.  Stoop: A small uncovered platform or porch at the entrance to a dwelling, usually up several
              steps from the sidewalk.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:36
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.001

       305.  Storage Area for Solid Waste or Recyclables: The space necessary to store mixed solid waste
              and source separated recyclables that accumulate between collection days.

       306.  Story: That portion of a building included between a floor and the ceiling next above it,
              exclusive of a basement.

       307.  Street: The entire right-of-way of a dedicated public way, which provides vehicular and
              pedestrian access to adjacent properties. Except in the Village zone, a right-of-way less than
              20 feet in width shall not be recognized as a street.

       308.  Street, Arterial: A street used primarily for through traffic.

       309.  Street, Collector: A street used to some extent for through traffic and to some extent for
              access to abutting properties.

       310.  Street, Frontage: A minor street parallel to and adjacent to a major street providing access to
              abutting properties and protection from through traffic.

       311.  Street, Half: A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a development
              where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another adjacent develop-
              ment. In the Village Zone, see Section 4.125(.09), Street Improvement Standards.

       312.  Street, Private: Same as Private Drive.

       313.  Street Tree Master Plan: A plan that denotes the species, spacing, minimum size and location
              of all street trees.

       314.  Street, Local: A street used exclusively for access to abutting properties.

       315.  Structure: Anything built which requires location on the ground or is attached to something
              having a location on the ground. For floodplain management purposes a structure is a walled
              and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

       316.  Structured Parking: Enclosure for the storage of four or more vehicles.

       317.  Subdivide: To effect a subdivision of land, as defined below.

       318.  Subdivider: Any owner commencing proceedings under Sections 4.200 to 4.290 to effect a
              subdivision of land.

       319.  Subdivision: Either an act of subdividing land, or an area or tract of land subdivided as
              defined in this Code. A subdivision means the division of land into more than three lots.

       320.  Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
              restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of
              the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

       321.  Substantial Development: Receipt of a valid public works permit or building permit for
              construction activities, other than a grading permit, is deemed to constitute "substantial
              development."

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:37
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       322.  Substantial Improvement: Means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure,
              the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, as
              determined by the City's Building Official, either:

              A.     Before the improvement or repair is started, or
              B.      If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
                     For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur
                     when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
                     building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
                     the structure. The term is not used in the same manner as the term "substantial
                     development" and does not include either:
                     (1)    Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
                            health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
                            safe living conditions, or
                     (2)    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
                            a State Inventory of Historic Places.

       323.  Sunchart: One or more photographs that plot the position of the sun between 10:30 am and
              1:30 pm on January 21, prepared pursuant to guidelines issued by the Planning Director. The
              sunchart shall show the southern skyline through a transparent grid on which is imposed
              solar altitude for a 45-degree and 30-minute northern latitude in ten-degree increments and
              solar azimuth from true south in 15-degree increments.

       324.  Support Structure (Telecommunication): The structure to which wireless communication
              antennae and other necessary hardware are mounted. For purposes of this ordinance the
              terms "support structure," "tower," and "transmission tower" shall be interchangeable.
              Support structures include, but are not limited to:

              A.     Guyed Tower: A tower which is supported, in whole or in part, by the use of cables (guy
                     wires) and ground anchors.

              B.      Lattice tower: A freestanding support structure which consists of an open framework of
                     crossed metal braces on three or four sides which stabilize the tower and which is built
                     without guy wires and ground anchors.

              C.     Monopole: A freestanding support structure consisting of a single upright pole sunk
                     into the ground and/or attached to a foundation and engineered to be self-supporting
                     without guy wires or ground anchors.

       325.  Supporting streets: New streets within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District,
              which may be located within public rights-of-way or public easements.

       326.  Terrace: A raised space or platform adjoining a building, paved or planted, especially one
              used for leisure enjoyment.

       327.  Temporary Lighting. Lighting installed with temporary wiring and operated for less than 120
              days in any calendar year.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:38
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

       328.  Theater: A building or outdoor structure providing facilities for the presentation of perfor-
              mances.

       329.  Through connections: New streets, multi-use paths, or streets that combine characteristics of
              local streets and multi-use paths. They are located within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design
              Overlay District and may be located within public rights-of-way or public easements.

       330.  Through Zone: The width of unobstructed space on a sidewalk or pedestrian pathway.

       331.  Tower Footprint: The area described at the base of a transmission tower as the perimeter of
              the transmission tower including the transmission tower foundation and any attached or
              overhanging equipment, attachments or structural members but excluding ancillary facilities
              and guy wires and anchors.

       332.  Tower Height: The distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for
              operation to the lowest point, which is defined as the bottom of the base of the structure
              being measured at either roof level for a roof-mounted structure or at ground level for a
              freestanding structure. The height of  a tower shall include the height of  any antennae
              positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower.

       333.  Tower Pad: The area encompassing the tower footprint, ancillary facilities, fencing and
              screening.

       334.  Town Center: That part of the community that is generally bounded by, or adjoining, Town
              Center Loop Road.

       335.  Townhouse: A dwelling unit constructed in a row of two or more attached units, where each
              dwelling unit is located on an individual lot.

       336.  Townhouse project: One or more townhouse structures constructed, or proposed to be
              constructed, together with the development site where the land has been divided, or is
              proposed to be divided, to reflect the townhouse property lines and any commonly owned
              property.

       337.  Trailers, Travel Trailers, Mobile Coaches: A vehicle or structure constructed for movement
              on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking or plumbing facilities and is intended for
              temporary residential and/or recreational uses. Trailers, travel trailers, and mobile coaches do
              not meet the standards to be considered mobile homes or manufactured dwellings noted
              above.

       338.  Transit Stop: A designated location along or near a transit street for pick-up and drop-off of
              transit users.

       339.  Transit Station: A facility at a major transit stop accommodating multiple types of trans-
              portation, including the seating, sheltering, pick-up, and drop-off of transit users; bicycle
              storage; automobile drop-off lanes; and other uses compatible with transit use.

       340.  Transit Street: A designated transit route with one or more transit stops serving TRI-MET
              or South Metro Area Rapid Transit (SMART) riders.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:39
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       341.  Tree: Any living, standing woody plant having a trunk six inches or more d.b.h. at four and
              one-half feet above grade.

       342.  Tree Cutting: The falling or removal of a tree, or any procedure the natural result of which is
              to cause the death or substantial destruction of a tree, including topping and severe cutting
              back of limbs to such a degree as to destroy or adversely affect the normal growth pattern of
              the tree. Cutting does not include routine pruning or trimming.

       343.  Tree Preservation and Protection Plan: A plan that indicates the locations of existing trees to
              be preserved and the methods to be employed to do so. See the City of Wilsonville Tree
              Preservation Code, Section 4.600 for additional information.

       344.  Tree Pruning: Reduction of a tree to achieve a better shape and more fruitful growth, using
              common practices of  the arboriculture industry, including the International Society of
              Arboriculture, the Oregon Department of Forestry (Urban Forestry), or other professional
              arboriculture industry organizations.

       345.  Tree Survey: Information provided by an arborist which describes size, species, health, and
              condition, and an accurate map that locates the trees on the property and descriptive text.
              Tree surveys shall be provided in keeping with WC 4.610.30 and 4.610.40.

       346.  Tree Topping: The severe cutting of the top or limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree
              so as to remove the natural canopy or disfigure the tree.

       347.  Triplex: Three attached dwelling units on a single lot.

       348.  TRP: Tree Removal Permit.

       349.  Undevelopable area: As used in the solar access provisions of this Code, an area that cannot
              be used practicably for a habitable structure, because of natural conditions, such as slopes
              exceeding 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south, severe
              topographic relief, water bodies, or conditions that isolate one portion of a property from
              another portion so that access is not practicable to the unbuildable portion; or man-made
              conditions, such as existing development which isolates a portion of the site and prevents its
              further development; setbacks or development restrictions that prohibit development of a
              given area of a lot by law or private agreement; or existence or absence of easements or access
              rights that prevent development of a given area.

       349.1  Urban Form: The physical characteristics of an area determined by the bulk, placement,
              and spacing of buildings and related site improvements.

       349.2  Urban Form Type: A categorization between different planned Urban Forms with Type 1
              having the most urban look and feel and Type 3 having the least urban look and feel.

       349.3  Urban Form Type Designation: A designation applied to land that determines Urban Form
              Type and what lot and structure standards apply to guide Urban Form.

       350.  Urban Growth Management Function Plan (UGMFP): Regulatory requirements imposed on
              local governments by Metro.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:40
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.001

       351.  Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which
              either land or a building is or may be occupied.
       352.  Utilities: Any water, gas, sewer, storm drainage, electrical, telephone, or communication
              service and all persons, companies, and agencies supplying the same.
       353.  Value: Current market value or replacement cost as determined by a licensed or certified
              professional in the tree, nursery, or landscape field.
       354.  Variance: Means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits
              construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance. A Variance
              does not allow a use that is prohibited by this Chapter.
       355.  View Corridor: As located and defined in the Master Plan, a view corridor is a panorama or
              line-of-site that, for aesthetic or cultural reasons, is to remain free of  noncontributing
              elements.
       356.  Village Center: An area illustrated and described in the Villebois Village Master Plan,
              providing a mixture of residential and commercial uses, at the intersection of three neigh-
              borhoods. The Village Center is the focal point of civic and commercial activity.
       357.  Village Center Architectural Standards: A document that includes standards for all buildings
              within the Village Center.
       358.  Village Zone: The zoning district that is applied to areas designated Residential Village on the
              Wilsonville Comprehensive Plan Map. The Village zone implements the Residential-Village
              designation and the Villebois Village Master Plan. Also known as the V zone.

       359.  Villebois Village Master Plan: The approved document depicting the general organizational
              structure of  the Villebois Village Concept Plan, implemented by the Residential-Village
              Comprehensive Plan designation, and the Village (V) zone, including but not limited to the
              form and location of public open spaces, types and alignment of the utilities and various
              thoroughfares, and land use types and locations.

       360.  Violation: The division or use of land or structures, or the construction of, addition to, or
              alteration of, structures in a manner that does not fully comply with the provisions of
              Chapter 4. Structures located in flood hazard areas without adequate elevation certificates or
              other satisfactory proof of compliance with the provisions of Section 4.172 will be presumed
              to be in violation until such time as the necessary information has been provided to the
              Community Development Director.

       361.  Wall: An upright construction having a length greater than the thickness and presenting a
              continuous surface except where pierced by doors, windows, etc., used for shelter, protection,
              or privacy.
       362.  Water-Dependent: A use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water
              areas because the use requires access to the water body for water-borne transportation,
              recreation, energy production or source of water.
       363.  Water-Related: Uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but
              which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:41
§ 4.001                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of
              quality in the goods or services offered. Except as necessary for water-dependent or water-
              related uses or facilities, residences, parking lots, spoil and dump sites, roads and highways,
              restaurants, businesses, factories; and trailer parks are not generally considered dependent on
              or related to water location needs.
       364.  Wayfinding Plan: See Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan.
       365.  Wetlands: Existing wetlands include jurisdictional wetlands as determined by the Division of
              State Lands (DSL) and/or the US Army Corps of Engineers (COE). "Wetlands" are those
              areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration
              sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
              vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Created wetlands are
              mitigation wetlands as defined by the Division of  State Lands or US Army Corps of
              Engineers. For the purpose of this ordinance, wetlands shall not include these constructed
              facilities:
              A.     Stormwater treatment ponds or swales;
              B.      Stormwater treatment wetlands;
              C.     Detention ponds;
              D.     A 25-foot buffer adjacent to the wetland;
              E.     An off-stream recreational lake, lagoon, fire pond or reservoir; and
              F.      Ditches that are not mapped within the Significant Resources Overlay Zone and are
                     constructed solely for the purpose of draining roads, lots, and outfalls of storm drains.
       366.  Wildlife Habitat: A Goal 5 resource defined as an area upon which wildlife depend in order
              to meet their requirements for food, water, shelter and reproduction. Wildlife habitat in the
              City of Wilsonville Natural Resource Inventory and Goal 5, Title 3, Endangered Species Act
              Compliance and Protection Plan refers to upland, forested areas of at least one-acre size.
              Hazelnut orchards, small clumps of trees and areas with only a few scattered trees are not
              included as wildlife habitat.
       367.  Wireless Communication Facilities (WCF): An unstaffed facility for the transmission and
              reception of radio or microwave signals used for commercial communications. WCFs are
              composed of two or more of the following components: (1) antenna: (2) support structure:
              (3) equipment enclosures; and (4) security barrier.
       368.  Yard: The open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed other than
              by landscaping or permitted fences from the ground upward, between a structure or struc-
              tures and any lot line. The minimum horizontal distance between any point on a lot line and
              the nearest part of any structure or building is the yard depth.

       369.  Yard, Front: Any yard abutting a street or private drive, unless one side is determined to meet
              the definition of a side yard, below. Private drives which are bounded on two sides by a single
              lot shall not be considered in determining if a yard is a front yard.

       370.  Yard, Rear: Any yard abutting a rear lot line.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:42
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.004

       371.  Yard, Side: Any yard abutting a side lot line and, for corner lots, the side with the longest
              frontage along a street or private drive. Where a corner lot has an existing building with a
              primary entrance, the side along a street or private drive without the entrance shall be deemed
              the side yard. Where a corner lot has the same amount of frontage on both streets or private
              drives, and no primary building entrance facing either street or private drive, the Planning
              Director may designate the side yard in order to determine required setbacks. Private drives
              which are bounded on two sides by a single lot shall not be considered in determining if a yard
              is a side yard.
(Ord. No. 317, 11-4-1987; Ord. No. 426, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 479, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002;
Ord. No. 545, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 595, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 647, 4-21-2008; Ord.
No. 649, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 667, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 675, 3-1-2010; Ord. No.
682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 686, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No.
719, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 806, 07-17-2017; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 825, 10-15-2018; Ord. No.
892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.002.  Scope, Interpretation and Compliance.

(.01)  A parcel of land may be used, developed by land division or otherwise, and a structure may be used
       or developed by construction, reconstruction, alteration, occupancy or otherwise only as this Code
       permits. In addition to complying with the criteria and other provisions within this Code, each
       development shall comply with (1) the applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan, and (2) any
       conditions of approval established by the City of Wilsonville. The requirements of this Code apply
       to the property owner, the person undertaking a development or the user of a development and to
       the person's successors in interest.

(.02)  Illustrations, examples and graphic materials contained in this Code are intended to aid in
       interpretation but are not intended to replace, or take precedence over, the text.

Section  4.003.  Consistency with Plan and Laws.

Actions initiated under this Code shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and with applicable
State and Federal laws and regulations as these plans, laws and regulations may now or hereafter provide.

Section  4.004.  Development Permit Required.

(.01)  Except as excluded by Section 4.005, no person shall directly or indirectly engage in or cause to
       occur a development for which a development permit has not been issued. The building official
       shall not issue a permit for the construction, reconstruction or alteration of a structure or a part of
       a structure for which a development permit has not been issued.

(.02)  A development permit shall be issued by the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions
       set forth in Sections 4.035 of this Code. The Director shall not issue a development permit for the
       improvement or use of land that has been previously divided or otherwise developed in violation of
       this Code, regardless of whether the permit applicant or its predecessor created the violation,
       unless the violation can be rectified as part of the development.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:42.1
§ 4.004                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  Unless appealed, as provided in Section 4.022, a decision on a development permit shall be final
       upon expiration of the period provided for filing an appeal or, if appealed, upon rendering of the
       decision by the reviewing body.

Section  4.005  Exclusions from Development Permit Requirement.

An activity or development listed below is excluded from the requirements for a development permit.
       (.01)  Landscaping, provided that plant materials specifically prohibited by the Wilsonville Code
              are not installed.
       (.02)  A change internal to a building or other structure that does not substantially affect the use
              of the structure or an alteration that does not substantially affect the use or appearance of
              land or a structure.
       (.03)  An emergency measure necessary for the safety or protection of people or property.
       (.04)  Farming, provided that the farming is a continuation of agricultural activities on the site and
              is not a temporary process as a precursor to other development of the site.
       (.05)  Except as otherwise required by Sections 4.184 and 4.500 to 4.510, the establishment,
              construction or termination of an authorized public facility that serves development, includ-
              ing such facilities as a private street, transportation facilities within the public right-of-way,
              sewer, water line, electrical power or gas distribution line, or telephone or television cable
              system, provided said construction complies with applicable Public Works Standards. This
              exemption is not intended to apply to buildings used by utility providers.
       (.06)  Installation or construction of  an accessory structure that does not require a building
              permit.
       (.07)  Minor clearing or grading for purposes of site surveying, or exploratory excavations under
              direction of a civil engineer or engineering geologist, provided said grading or excavation is
              consistent with Building Code requirements.
       (.08)  Exclusion from a permit does not exempt the development or its use from applicable
              requirements of the Comprehensive Plan or from the tree preservation or protection require-
              ments of Section 4.600.00, et seq. (Tree Preservation and Protection).
(Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013)

Section  4.006.  Use of a Development.

A development may be used only in a manner that is not prohibited by law and for which the development
is designed, arranged and intended or which is "nonconforming" as defined in Section 4.001.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:42.2
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.008

Section  4.007 Lawfully Existing Development.

For the purposes of this Code, lawfully existing uses shall include the following:

      (.01)  AlllawfullyexistinglandusesandbuildingsdevelopedinaccordancewiththeComprehen-
             sive Plan and Zoning Ordinance, including land uses and buildings that were legally estab-
             lished subject to Ordinance No. 23 or 154, and Design Review Ordinance No. 38 or
             Subdivision Ordinance No. 16.

      (.02)  Allsitedevelopmentpermits,PlannedDevelopmentPermits,FinalDevelopmentPlans,and
             tentativeplatsapprovedbythePlanningCommissionorDevelopmentReviewBoardpriorto
             the effective date of this Code shall be valid for the purposes of submittal of final plats or
             issuance of Building Permits, unless they have expired as provided in Section 4.023. Said
             plansshallremainvalid,consistentwiththeconditionsandtimelimitationsineffectonthe
             effectivedateof thisCodeandconditionsof approvalimposedontheapplication.Develop-
             ment approvals are subject to expiration as provided in Section 4.023.

Section  4.008. Application Procedures—In General.

(.01)  ThegeneralapplicationprocedureslistedinSections4.008through4.024applytoalllanduseand
      developmentapplicationsgovernedbyChapter4of theWilsonvilleCode.Theseincludeapplica-
      tions for all of the following types of land use or development approvals:

      A.     Class I and Class II Administrative Reviews, pursuant to Section 4.030;

      B.      Stage I and Stage II Site Development Permits, pursuant to Section 4.035;

      C.     Conditional Use Permits, pursuant to Section 4.184;

      D.     Variances, pursuant to Section 4.196;

      E.     Quasi-judicial zone changes, pursuant to Section 4.197;

      F.      Changes to the text of Chapter 4, pursuant to Section 4.197;

      G.     Quasi-judicialchangestothemapormapsof theComprehensivePlan,pursuanttoSection
             4.198;

      H.     Changestothetextof theComprehensivePlan,includingadoptionof newPlanelementsor
             sub-elements, pursuant to Section 4.198;

      I.      Subdivisions, condominium divisions, and land partitions, pursuant to Section 4.200;

      J.       Expedited land divisions and middle housing land divisions, pursuant to Section 4.232;

      K.     Annexations, pursuant to Section 4.700; and

      L.     Street vacations, pursuant to ORS 271 and Sections 4.031 and 4.032 of this Code.

      M.    SpecificAreaPlans,preliminaryDevelopmentPlansandFinalDevelopmentPlans,pursuant
             to Section 4.125.

                                                       CD4:43
§ 4.008                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.02)  UniquefeaturesofWilsonville'sdevelopmentreviewprocesses. TheWilsonvilleLandDevelopment
      and Planning Ordinance is structured and implemented differently than the Codes of most other
      cities. These differences are summarized below:

      A.     Most of Wilsonville's vacant land (without active approved projects) is zoned RA-H, a
             Residential-Agricultural holding zone with a large minimum lot size. Properties in this
             holding zone must be rezoned to conform with the Comprehensive Plan as part of the
             planned development review process.

      B.      If the subject property is over two acres in size, it must be zoned in one of the Planned
             Development categories, (PDR, PDC, TC, PDI, RN etc.), or zoned for public use, before it
             can be developed.

      C.     Someportionsof aparcelmayhavedevelopmentconstraintsbecauseof suchthingsassteep
             slopes, wetlands, wildlife habitat, hazard areas, or trees.

      D.     In residential developments, at least 25 percent of the site area must be preserved as open
             space, unless otherwise provided for in a legislative master plan. Some of the site is also
             typically required to be recreational area. See Section 4.113 for more information on
             requirements for open space and recreational area in residential developments. For all
             projects,atleast15percentof thenetsiteareamustbelandscapedincludingvegetativeplant
             materials.

      E.     UnlesswaivedbytheCommunityDevelopmentDirectorforgoodcause,atrafficstudymust
             becompletedtodeterminethattheCity'slevelof servicestandardscanbemet,considering
             the subject development and all previously approved projects.

      F.      ForaPlannedDevelopmenttherearefourphasesof projectapproval.Someof thesephases
             may be combined, but generally the approvals move from the conceptual stage through to
             detailed architectural, landscape and site plan review in stages:
             1.      Rezoning;

             2.      Stage 1—Preliminary Plan;
             3.      Stage 2—Final Plan; and

             4.      Site Design Review.

      G.     Approval of each stage shall remain valid unless it expires as provided in Section 4.023. A
             Stage I approval will not be revoked or substantially altered during the Stage II review
             process,unlessrequestedbytheapplicant.StageIIapprovalwillnotberevokedorsubstan-
             tially altered during the Site Design Review process, unless requested by the applicant.
             Zoning may be changed by action of the City Council, but will not be subject to automatic
             revocationunlesssuchrevocationisspecificallymadeaconditionof approvalatthetimeof
             the original zone change.

      H.     In Wilsonville, the practice is to review each new phase in light of previous approvals and
             conditions.Atconstructionandoccupancy,thereviewincludesinspectionstoverifycompli-
             ance with conditions of approval. These inspections include detailed site comparison with

                                                        CD4:44
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.009

             previousplanapprovals(includingnumberandtypesof plantsanddesignof elevationsand
             setbacks).Developersareoftenrequiredtopostabondorprovideotherfinancialsecurityfor
             the completion of the conditions of approval for the project.
      I.      Wilsonville uses a "concurrency" requirement regarding public services and facilities. Basi-
             cally,theneededservicesandfacilitiesmustbescheduledforcompletionwithintwoyearsof
             occupancy and a positive finding of  such concurrency must be made prior to project
             approval.
      J.       Wilsonville expects project progress to be made in a timely fashion. For each step in the
             Planned Development, the applicant must take action to "exercise" the approval within a
             given time period or the approval lapses.
      K.     Special additional features include: mixed use provisions for most zones ability to "waive"
             many of the typical development standards based on design improvements that will result;
             density transfers; strong variance provisions; tree protection with mitigation requirements
             fortreecutting;CityCouncil"CallUp"provisions;heavylandscapingrequirements;owner/
             developer signature to accept and abide by conditions; limited administrative approval
             power; enforcement powers and practice.
      L.     ForLandintheVillagezone,therearethreephasesof projectapproval.Someof thesephases
             may be combined, but generally the approvals move from the conceptual stage through to
             detailed architectural, landscape and plan review in phases:
             1.      Specific Area Plan (SAP);
             2.      PreliminaryDevelopmentPlan(PDP),Rezoning,andFinalDevelopmentPlan(FDP);
                   and
             3.      Land Division Approval.
             Land within the Central SAP or multi-family dwellings outside of the Central SAP may be
             developedinfourphases,withtheapplicationandapprovalof anFDPoccurringafterPDP
             approval.
(Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 574, 11-1-2004; Ord. No. 587, 5-16-2005; Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017;
Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Section  4.009. Who May Initiate Applications.

(.01)  ExceptforaSpecificAreaPlan(SAP),applicationsinvolvingspecificsitesmaybefiledonlybythe
      owner of the subject property, by a unit of government that is in the process of acquiring the
      property,orbyanagentwhohasbeenauthorizedbytheowner,inwriting,toapply.Changestothe
      ComprehensivePlanorzoningmayalsobeinitiatedbytheCityCouncil,PlanningCommission,or
      Development Review Board, acting by motion. Applications involving a Specific Area Plan shall
      be initiated as provided in Section 4.125(.18)(C) and (D).

(.02)  Applicationsinvolvinglargeareasof thecommunityorproposedamendmentstothetextof this
      ChapterortheComprehensivePlanmaybeinitiatedbyanypropertyowner,businessproprietor,or
      residentof theCity,aswellasbytheCityCouncil,PlanningCommission,orDevelopmentReview
      Board acting by motion.

                                                      CD4:45
§ 4.009                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  AdecisionbytheCityCouncil,PlanningCommission,orDevelopmentReviewBoardtoinitiate
      an action under this Section does not predetermine that the same body will approve or adopt the
      proposed change after concluding public hearings.

(.04)  IntheeventthattheCityof Wilsonvilleistheapplicant,theCityManagermayauthorizeanyCity
      employee or consultant to act as the City's agent.
(Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003)

Section  4.010. How to Apply.

(.01)  ContactPlanningDepartment.ProspectiveapplicantsareadvisedtocontactthePlanningDepart-
      ment of the City's Community Development Department for application forms and information
      on application procedures.

(.02)  Pre-ApplicationConference.

      A.     Anapplicantortheapplicant'sauthorizedrepresentativeshallcontactthePlanningDepart-
             menttoarrangeapre-applicationconference,unlesstheapplicantandthePlanningDirector
             agree the conference is not needed.

      B.      The conference shall be held within 30 days of the request.

      C.     The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and
             procedural requirements of the Code, provide for an exchange of information regarding
             applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan and development standards, arrange such
             technical and design assistance as will aid the applicant, and to otherwise identify policies
             and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed
             development.

      D.     Suchconferenceswillbeopentothepublicunlesstheprospectiveapplicantrequestsaprivate
             conference. Private pre-application conferences are conducted in order to protect the inter-
             ests of those who have not yet completed property acquisition arrangements, or who are
             concerned about providing proprietary information that may give an advantage to compet-
             ing developers or businesses. However, once an application has been filed with the City, all
             information that is part of the public record will be available for public review.

      E.     The Planning Department if requested in writing by the applicant at least one week in
             advance of the pre-application conference, shall provide the applicant with a written sum-
             mary of the conference within five working days after the conference. If prepared, written
             summaries of pre-application conferences shall be available for public review. Summaries
             shall include:

             1.      Confirmation of the procedures to be used to process the application;

             2.      A list of materials to be submitted; and

             3.      The criteria and standards which may apply to the approval of the application.

                                                         CD4:46
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.011

Section  4.011.  How Applications are Processed.

(.01)  Applications submitted without the required filing fee, or the correct authorization as specified in
       Section 4.009, shall not be considered to be "filed" and shall be returned to the prospective
       applicant without being processed.

(.02)  After filing, all applications shall be reviewed by City staff for completeness.

       A.     In the event that an application is found to be incomplete in any way, the Planning Director
              shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of the original filing and shall list the
              deficiencies in the application.

       B.      City Council Resolution No. 796 precludes the approval of any development application
              without the prior payment of all applicable City liens for the subject property. Applicants
              shall be encouraged to contact the City Finance Department to verify that there are no
              outstanding liens. If the Planning Director is advised of outstanding liens while an applica-
              tion is under consideration, the Director shall advise the applicant that payments must be
              made current or the existence of liens will necessitate denial of the application.

       C.     Failure of an applicant to remedy any deficiencies in an application prior to the preparation
              of  the staff  report on the matter shall constitute adequate grounds for denial of  the
              application by the appropriate decision-making body. Failure of an applicant to provide the
              deficient information may be considered to be a "refusal" as the term is used in ORS 197, and
              the application shall be processed accordingly.

       D.     Upon concluding that an application is complete, or that it will be processed in spite of the
              applicant's failure or refusal to correct any deficiencies in the application, the Planning
              Director shall provide copies of the application materials to other affected agencies and City
              departments, requesting their input and recommendations for the record.

              1.      Such other agencies and departments shall be given a specified amount of time to
                     respond, sufficient to allow the planning staff an opportunity to complete the prepa-
                     ration of a written staff report for the review of the public and decision-makers. For
                     public hearing items, staff reports are printed and available for review seven days prior
                     to the time when a public hearing is conducted.

              2.      Each written staff report includes a list of the agencies and departments contacted in
                     the review process and their written comments, if any.

(.03)  Written testimony that is sent via mail, facsimile, or computer will be processed as specified in
       Section 4.035. All parties are discouraged from relying exclusively on these means of submitting
       testimony unless verification is received that the subject testimony has been received and made part
       of the record.
(Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:47
§ 4.012                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.012.  Public Hearing Notices.

(.01)  Published Notice. The Planning Director shall have published in a newspaper of general circula-
       tion in the City of Wilsonville, prior to the date of the Planning Commission or Development
       Review Board meeting, a notice that the Commission or the Board will consider proposals,
       documents, or pending applications.

       A.     If the matter will require a public hearing, the notice shall be published at least ten and not
              more than 21 days before the first hearing.

       B.      The publication shall contain a brief description of the subject property, including either the
              street address or other common description of  the site, and including the approximate
              geographic location such as a reference to nearby cross streets, the time and place that the
              City's decision-making body will consider the submitted documents, and the nature of the
              proposal, as well as other matters required by law. Failure to advertise as specified in this
              Section shall not invalidate any decisions or proceedings of the City if a good faith attempt
              was made to comply with the notice requirements of this Code.

(.02)  Mailed Notice for Quasi-Judicial Hearings.

       A.     For development projects involving Class II Administrative Reviews, or quasi-judicial public
              hearings, the Planning Director shall ensure the following:

              1.      Public hearing notices shall be mailed to the owners of real property located within 250
                     feet of the site of the proposed development. The Planning Director shall use the
                     property ownership lists of the County Assessor in determining the recipients of the
                     notices.

              2.      Notice shall be sent to any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an
                     intergovernmental agreement entered into with the City and any other affected road-
                     way authority. The failure of another agency to respond with written comments on a
                     pending application shall not invalidate an action or permit approval made by the City
                     under this Code.

       B.      Notices shall be mailed not less than 20 days nor more than 40 days prior to the initial public
              hearing date. Except, however, in cases where the development proposal will require public
              hearings before both the City Council and Development Review Board, in which case the
              notices shall be mailed at least ten days before the initial public hearing.

       C.     In any case where State law requires different timing or form of notice than that specified in
              this Code, the standard requiring a broader coverage or duration of notice shall be followed.

       D.     The City will make a good faith effort to contact property owners whose names do not appear
              on County ownership records and to contact others who have asked to be contacted for
              different types of applications.

(.03)  Mailed Notice for Legislative Hearings. Where applicable, the Planning Director shall have notices
       of legislative hearings mailed to individual property owners as specified in State law.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:48
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.015

(.04)  Posted Notice.

       A.     The Planning Director shall have notice of  development proposals, subject to Class II
              administrative or hearing body review, posted in at least three standard locations for public
              notice. In addition, the property proposed for development may be posted so as to be visible
              and legible from adjacent public streets.

       B.      Notice shall be posted not less than 21 nor more than forty (40) days prior to the anticipated
              date of final decision or hearing, except in the case where the notice concerns public hearings
              before both the City Council and either the Planning Commission or Development Review
              Board. In such cases, the notice shall be posted at least ten, and not more than 40, days before
              the initial hearing.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002)

Section  4.013.  Hearing Procedures.

(.01)  Public Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures for evidentiary hearings set
       forth in Section 2.560 of the Wilsonville Code, or as otherwise amended by City Council action.

(.02)  Decision. Following the public hearing, the hearing body shall approve, conditionally approve, or
       deny the application or if the hearing is in the nature of an appeal, affirm, reverse or remand the
       decision that is on appeal.

(.03)  A final decision involving a hearing on an application for a Development Permit shall be made
       within120 days of the application being deemed complete; other than expedited land divisions and
       middle housing land divisions requiring expedited review under state law, as indicated in Section
       4.232, which require a final decision within 63 days of a complete filing. Except, however, that with
       agreement of the hearing body and the applicant or appellant, the processing of a matter under
       consideration may be extended for a reasonable period of time as determined by the hearing body.

Section  4.014.  Burden of Proof.

The burden of proving that the necessary findings of fact can be made for approval of any land use or
development application rests with the applicant in the case. In the case of an appeal, the burden of proof
rests with the appellant.

Section  4.015.  Findings and Conditions.

(.01)  All decisions on applications filed pursuant to this Chapter shall include written findings of fact
       and may include conditions of approval. Findings of fact shall include:

       A.     A statement of the applicable criteria against which the proposal was tested, and of the
              hearing body's interpretation of what would be required to achieve compliance with the
              criteria and standards.

       B.      A statement of the facts which the hearing body found establishing compliance or noncom-
              pliance with each applicable criterion and assurance of compliance with applicable stan-
              dards.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:49
§ 4.015                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       C.     The reasons for a conclusion to approve or deny.

       D.     The decision to deny or approve the proposed change with or without conditions.

(.02)  Any graphic or written information, as well as any verbal commitments made by an applicant or
       applicant's agent during a public hearing, shall automatically be included as requirements of any
       approval granted by the City, unless specifically altered or waived by the City's decision-making
       body.

(.03)  Those testifying in a public hearing process, either for or against a given application, are
       encouraged to submit draft findings of fact for the consideration of the decision-makers. The
       decision-makers may choose to adopt as findings of fact any part, or none, of any testimony that
       is submitted.

Section  4.016.  Notification of Action on Applications.

All individuals who are required by law to receive notification, as well as any persons who submit oral or
written testimony on an application, shall be provided with written notification of the decision on the
application at the same time. This notification shall include information on local appeal procedures and
requirements.

Section  4.017.  Withdrawal of Application

(.01)  An application for a zone change or development permit may be withdrawn, at the request of the
       applicant, any time up to the point that the first public hearing on the matter is closed. Once the
       hearing has been closed, however, a final decision shall be made and no withdrawal request will be
       accepted.

(.02)  If an application is withdrawn within one week of the date it was submitted, the application fee,
       less a 15 percent administrative cost, shall be refunded. Any withdrawal after one week of the date
       it was submitted shall be without any refund or application fees, unless the Director authorizes a
       refund because of an unusual hardship to the applicant. In such cases, the Director shall determine
       an appropriate refund based upon the costs already incurred by the city in processing the
       application.
(Ord. No. 282, 12-16-1985)

Section  4.018.  Participation by Interested Officers or Employees.

No officer or employee of the City who has a financial or other private interest in a proposal shall
participate in discussion with or give an official opinion to the hearing body on the proposal without first
declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest.

Section  4.019.  Hearing Body—Conflicts of Interest.

(.01)  A member of the hearing body shall disclose any actual or potential conflict of interest before
       participating in any hearing body proceeding or action on a planning matter involving action on

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:50
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.020

       any particular parcel of real estate. No member shall participate as a member of the hearing body
       if that member has an actual conflict of interest. A member of the hearing body may participate as
       a member of the public at large in cases where that member has an actual conflict of interest.

(.02)  An actual conflict of interest arises when any of the following persons have direct or substantial
       financial interest in the particular parcel of real estate or in property immediately adjacent to that
       real estate:

       A.     The member or the member's spouse,

       B.      A brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law or mother-in-law of the member,

       C.     Any business associate of the member within the previous two years, a prospective partner, an
              employer or prospective employer.

(.03)  If a member of the hearing body shows evidence of or declares a potential conflict of interest,
       members of  the public or other members of  the hearing body may challenge the member's
       participation in hearing body proceedings on the particular issue involved. Following such a
       challenge the member of the hearing body may either withdraw from participation or explain the
       invalidity of the challenge. In cases of potential conflict, the hearing body member, her/himself,
       will decide on her/his final participation.

(.04)  A potential conflict of interest arises when the member has an indirect financial interest in the
       particular parcel of real estate or in property immediately adjacent to that real estate or exhibits
       bias toward the real estate, its owners, or its tenants.

Section  4.020.  Ex Parte Contacts.

(.01)  The general public has a right to have hearing body members free from prehearing or ex-parte
       contacts on quasi-judicial matters heard by that hearing body. It is recognized that a countervailing
       public right is free access to public officials on any matter. Therefore, hearing body members shall
       reveal any significant prehearing or ex-parte contacts with regard to any matter at the commence-
       ment of  the public hearing on the matter. If  such contacts have not impaired the member's
       impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall participate or
       abstain as specified below.

(.02)  Abstention or Disqualification. Disqualification for reasons other than the member's own judg-
       ment may be ordered by a majority of the members of a hearing body present and voting. The
       member who is the subject of the motion for disqualification may not vote on the motion.

(.03)  Rights of Disqualified Member of the Hearing Body.

       A.     An abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body shall be counted for purposes of
              forming a quorum. A member who represents personal interest at a hearing may do so only
              by abstaining from voting on the proposal, physically joining the audience and vacating the
              seat on the hearing body, and making full disclosure of his or her status and position at the
              time of addressing the hearing body.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:51
§ 4.020                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       B.      If a majority of the members of a hearing body abstain or are disqualified, all members
              present after stating their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall by so doing be
              requalified and proceed to resolve the issues.

       C.     Except for appeal hearings conducted by the Council, a member not present during the
              presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the deliberations or final decision
              regarding the matter of the hearing unless the member has reviewed the evidence received.

Section  4.021.  Record of Proceedings.

The Secretary to the hearing body shall be present at each hearing and shall cause the proceedings to be
recorded stenographically or electronically.

       (.01)  Testimony shall be transcribed if required for judicial review or if ordered by the hearing
              body.

       (.02)  The hearing body shall, where practicable, retain as part of the hearing record each item of
              physical or documentary evidence received and made part of the record and shall have the
              items marked to show the identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on
              behalf of a proponent or opponent. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the
              hearing file until after the applicable appeal period has expired, at which time the exhibits
              may be released to the person identified thereon, or otherwise disposed of.

       (.03)  Included in the record shall be a brief statement that explains the criteria and standards
              considered relevant to the decision; states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision; and
              explains the justification for the decision based on the criteria, standards and facts set forth.

       (.04)  A person shall have access to the record of the proceedings at reasonable times, places and
              circumstances. A person shall be entitled to have copies of the record made at the person's
              own expense.

Section  4.022.  Appeal and Call-up Procedures.

(.01)  Administrative Action Appeals. A decision by the Planning Director on issuance of  a Site
       Development Permit may be appealed. Such appeals shall be heard by the Development Review
       Board for all quasi-judicial land use matters except expedited land divisions and middle housing
       land divisions requiring expedited review under state law, as indicated in Section 4.232, which may
       be appealed to a referee selected by the City to consider such cases. Only the applicant may appeal
       a Class I decision unless otherwise specified in Section 4.030, and such appeals shall be filed,
       including all of the required particulars and filing fee, with the City recorder as provided in this
       Section. Any affected party may appeal a Class II decision by filing an appeal, including all of the
       required particulars and filing fee, with the City Recorder within 14 calendar days of notice of the
       decision. Either panel of the Development Review Board, or both panels if convened together, may
       also initiate a call-up of the Director's decision by motion, without the necessity of paying a filing
       fee, for matters other than expedited land divisions and middle housing land divisions requiring
       expedited review under state law, as indicated in Section 4.232. The notice of appeal shall indicate

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:52
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.022

       the nature of the action or interpretation that is being appealed or called up and the matter at issue
       will be a determination of the appropriateness of the action or interpretation of the requirements
       of the Code.

(.02)  Board Action. A decision of the Development Review Board may be appealed to the Council by
       any affected party who participated in the hearing before the Board by filing an appeal, including
       all of the required particulars and filing fee, within 14 calendar days of the posting of the notice of
       decision, or by the call-up procedures listed below. The notice of appeal shall indicate the decision
       that is being appealed.

(.03)  City Council Call-up.

       A.     Within 14 calendar days of the posting of the Development Review Board notice of decision
              on any project, the City Council on its own motion, may cause any final action taken by the
              Development Review Board to be called up for review by the full Council. If the City Council
              determines by majority vote that an emergency exists in that the Development Review Board
              will not complete its review of a given application with sufficient time for the Council to
              consider and resolve any appeals within the statutorily mandated 120-day limit, the City
              Council may vote to call the matter up for hearing by the Council prior to the completion of
              the Development Review Board's action on the matter.

       B.      Notice of the call-up shall be provided in the same manner as an appeal to all parties who
              have testified or submitted written materials, the Planning Director, and the members of the
              respective commission or board, and shall also be posted and published as provided in
              Section 4.012. The notice shall describe the property, set forth the nature of the action and
              state the time, place and date set for hearing and whether public testimony is to be received.

       C.     In the event the City Council votes to call-up an action taken by the Development Review
              Board, any approvals granted by the Board shall be suspended until the Council has acted on
              the call-up.

       D.     Upon review, the Council may, by resolution or order, affirm, reverse or modify in whole or
              part, a determination, condition or requirement, or remand with or without instruction, the
              decision or part thereof that has been called up.

(.04)  Notice. Legal notice of a hearing on an appeal shall set forth:

       A.     The date of the hearing.

       B.      The issue(s) being appealed.

       C.     Whether the review will be on the record or whether new evidence will be accepted, if known.

(.05)  Scope of Review.

       A.     At its discretion, the hearing body may limit an appeal or review to a review of the record and
              a hearing for receipt of oral arguments regarding the record, or may accept new evidence and
              testimony. Except, however, that the standard of review on an appeal or call up of a staff
              decision to be heard by the Development Review Board is de novo.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:53
§ 4.022                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       B.      The reviewing body shall issue an order stating the scope of review on appeal to be one of the
              following:
              1.      Restricted to the record made on the decision being appealed.
              2.      Limited to such issues as the reviewing body determines necessary for a proper
                     resolution of the matter.

              3.      A de novo hearing on the merits.

(.06)  Review on the Record.

       A.     Unless otherwise provided for by the reviewing body, review of the decision on appeal shall
              be confined to the record of the proceeding as specified in this section. The record shall
              include:
              1.      A factual report prepared by the Planning Director or the Director's designee.

              2.      All exhibits, materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions submitted by
                     any party and received or considered in reaching the decision under review.
              3.      The written transcript or electronic recording of the hearing and a detailed summary of
                     the evidence.

       B.      The reviewing body shall make its decision based upon the record after first granting the right
              of argument on the record, but not the introduction of additional evidence to any party who
              has filed a notice of appeal. The reviewing body shall decide if the correct procedure was
              followed and if so, was the correct or appropriate decision made based on the applicable
              policies and standards.

(.07)  Review Consisting of Additional Evidence or De Novo Review.

       A.     Except as otherwise specified in this Code, or required by State law, the reviewing body may
              hear the entire matter de novo; or it may admit additional testimony and other evidence
              without holding a de novo hearing if it is satisfied that that additional testimony or other
              evidence could not reasonably have been presented at the prior hearing. The reviewing body
              shall consider all of the following in making such a decision.
              1.      Prejudice to the parties.
              2.      Convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing.

              3.      Surprise to opposing parties.
              4.      The competency, relevancy and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evi-
                     dence.

              5.      Such other factors as may be determined by the reviewing body to be appropriate.

       B.      "De novo hearing" shall mean a hearing by the review body as if the action had not been
              previously heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence
              and other material from the record of the previous consideration shall be included in the
              record of the review.

Supp. No. 3                                                 CD4:54
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.023

(.08)  Review Body Decision.

       A.     Upon review, the referee, Commission, or Board may by Resolution or the Council shall by
              order, affirm, reverse or modify in whole or part a determination or requirement of the
              decision that is under review.

              1.      When the referee, Commission, or Board modifies or renders a decision that reverses a
                     decision of the Planning Director, the referee, Commission or Board, in its Resolution,
                     shall set forth its findings and state its reasons for taking the action.

              2.      When the Council modifies or renders a decision that reverses a decision of  the
                     Commission or Board, the Council, in its order, shall set forth its findings and state its
                     reasons for taking the action.

              3.      When the Council modifies or renders a decision of the Commission or Board, the
                     Council, in its order, shall set forth its findings and state its reasons for taking the
                     action.

              4.      When the Council elects to remand the matter back to the lower review body for such
                     further consideration as it deems necessary, it shall include a statement explaining the
                     error to have materially affected the outcome of the original decision and the action
                     necessary to rectify such.

       B.      Action by the review body shall be decided by a majority vote of its members present at the
              meeting at which review was made and shall be taken either at that or any subsequent
              meeting. The review body shall render its decision no later than 60 calendar days after the
              filing of the request for review and shall file that decision with the City Recorder within five
              working days after it is rendered.

(.09)  Effective Date of  Decisions. A decision of  the Planning Director, Planning Commission, or
       Development Review Board shall become effective on the 15th) calendar day after the postmarked
       date of the written notice of decision, unless appealed or called up for review by the Council in
       accordance with this Section. If a matter is heard by the Council or referee, the decision shall
       become effective immediately.
(Ord. No. 396, 5-4-1992; Ord. No. 761, 12-1-2014; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.023.  Expiration of Development Approvals (See also Section 4.140).

(.01)  Except for Specific Area Plans (SAP), land use and development permits and approvals, including
       both Stage I and Stage II Planned Development approvals, shall be valid for a maximum of two
       years, unless extended as provided in this Section. Specific Area Plan approvals shall not expire.

       A.     Substantial development, as defined in this Chapter, has taken place in compliance with the
              permit or approval; or

       B.      A time extension has been granted by city staff for good cause. Not more than three such
              extensions may be granted, for not more than one year each.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:55
§ 4.023                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.02)  If the development approval is for a subdivision or partition, the developer has two years from the
       date of approval to submit the final plat for recordation, unless a time extension has been granted
       as specified in Section 4.023(.01), above. Use of the site or substantial development does not
       obviate the need for submittal of the final plat within the specified time limits.

(.03)  Zone changes shall not expire unless expiration provisions are specifically included in the zone
       order adopted by the City Council.

(.04)  Requests for time extensions shall be submitted in writing, including written justification there-
       fore, and received by the Planning Department not less than one calendar days prior to the
       expiration date of the permit or approval. A development approval shall not expire prior to a
       decision on the granting of this time extension if the request was submitted in accordance with this
       subsection.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 666, 7-20-2009; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A),
10-2-2023)

Section  4.024.  Prohibition of Resubmittal After Application Denial.

(.01)  If an application is denied for any reason by the City, no new application which is substantially the
       same as the previously denied application shall be resubmitted for at least one year after the
       previous denial. Except, however, that the City's decision-makers may specify in denying an
       application that the decision is without prejudice, and the applicant may resubmit at any time. The
       Planning Director shall be responsible for determining, subject to appeal, whether an application
       is substantially the same as an application that was previously denied.

(.02)  The Planning Commission, Development Review Board, or City Council may, after finding good
       cause, specifically authorize the resubmittal of an application within the one-year period. Good
       cause shall be shown by one or more of the following:

       A.     New evidence will be presented which was unavailable or unknown to the applicant at
              previous hearings and which could not have been discovered by reasonable diligence or the
              applicant; and/or

       B.      There has been a change of circumstances since the previous hearings which materially affect
              the applicant's real property, and as a result, the reasons for the denial, as stated by the
              Planning Commission, Development Review Board or City Council, no longer exist; and/or
       C.     A mistake was made at a previous hearing which was a significant factor in the denial of the
              previous application; and/or

       D.     The resubmitted application substantially corrects any stated grounds for denial of  the
              earlier application; and/or

       E.     Resubmitted application sufficiently revises the proposal to warrant consideration.

Section  4.025.  Enforcement and Administration.

(.01)  It shall be the duty of the Planning Director, to administer and enforce the provisions of Chapter
       4 of this Code in a manner to assure rapid and effective compliance.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:56
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.026

(.02)  The records of zoning actions and all amendments shall be officially held within the office of the
       City Recorder. All amendments to text and/or Official Zoning Map shall be approved or rejected
       by the City Council and acknowledged by the Mayor and attested by the City Recorder. Each
       action that changes a zoning district boundary shall be included on a new Official Zoning Map and
       approved by the Mayor and attested by the City Recorder and filed in the office of the City
       Recorder and will be the correct and binding zoning in all cases.

(.03)  The Commission or Board by a majority vote may instruct the Planning Director to enforce any
       provision of this Ordinance.

(.04)  When it appears to the City Council that there is a failure or refusal by any person, firm or
       corporation to comply with a final decision of the Board or Planning Commission, or of the
       Council in cases of appeal, or that there is a continuing violation otherwise of this Ordinance, the
       City Council may authorize the City Attorney to institute an appropriate suit in equity in the
       Circuit Court in the name of the City and abate and temporarily and permanently enjoin such
       violation.

Section  4.026.  Enforcement Procedures and Penalties.

(.01)  On new construction, and prior to occupancy, the Planning Director shall assure that the
       development has occurred in substantial conformance with the approved Site Development Plans.
       If substantial inconsistencies occur, the Director may withhold authorization for connection of
       domestic water service, or may authorize the disconnection of water service, if water service has
       already been established. The Director also has the authority to withhold temporary or permanent
       certificates of occupancy for all or part of a development until all applicable requirements are met.

(.02)  When a violation occurs, the Planning Director shall notify in writing the property owner and or
       known agent of the property owner of the violation. The notice shall set forth the nature of the
       violation and the necessary corrective action and shall specify the penalty for non-compliance and
       a reasonable date of compliance not to exceed 30 days from the date of notice. An error in the name
       of the owner or use of a name other than the true owner or agent of such property shall not render
       void such notice. In such case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient.

(.03)  If the violation has not been corrected, or a reasonable effort made to correct the violation within
       the time set forth in the notice, the Planning Director may cause the domestic water service to the
       property to be shut off as set by the Water Rates Ordinance.

(.04)  A violation of any provision of this Chapter is punishable, upon a first conviction, as a violation
       pursuant to Section l.0l2 of the Wilsonville Code, and upon a subsequent conviction, as a Class C
       Misdemeanor pursuant to Section l.0ll. In the case of a continuing offense, each day of any
       violation constitutes a separate offense.

(.05)  The City Attorney, at the request of the City Council, shall institute any necessary legal proceed-
       ings to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 253, 2-21-1984)

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:57
§ 4.027                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.027.  Saving Clause (Severability).

Should any section, clause or provision of  this Ordinance be declared by a Court of  competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part
thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid; each section, clause and provision hereof being
declared severable.

Section  4.028.  Fees.

Fees are for the purpose of defraying administrative costs and shall be governed by the provisions of a
Resolution duly adopted by the Wilsonville City Council. The City Council may establish fees sufficient
to cover all or part of the City's actual costs or actual average costs of processing applications.

Section  4.029.  Zoning to be Consistent with Comprehensive Plan.

If a development, other than a short-term temporary use, is proposed on a parcel or lot which is not
zoned in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, the applicant must receive approval of a zone change
prior to, or concurrently with the approval of an application for a Planned Development.

Section  4.030.  Jurisdiction and Powers of Planning Director and Community Development Director.

(.01)  Authority of Planning Director. The Planning Director shall have authority over the daily admin-
       istration  and  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  this  Chapter,  including  dealing  with  non-
       discretionary matters, and shall have specific authority as follows:
       A.     A Class I application shall be processed as a ministerial action without public hearing, shall
              not require public notice, and shall not be subject to appeal or call-up, except as noted below.
              Pursuant to Class I procedures set forth in Section 4.035, and upon finding that a proposal is
              consistent with the provisions of this Code and any applicable Conditions of Approval, shall
              approve the following, with or without conditions:
              1.      Minor site clearing and grading, prior to the approval of a Site Development Plan,
                     provided that:
                     a.      No clearing or grading occurs within the Significant Resource Overlay Zone.
                            Clearing or grading in the Significant Resource Overlay Zone shall require, at a
                            minimum, approval of a Class II permit through the procedures specified below;
                     b.      No clearing or grading occurs within 25 feet of an area that has been identified by
                            the City as a wetland;
                     c.      Not more than three trees are proposed to be removed;
                     d.      No fill or removal is proposed;
                     e.      Adequate measures are utilized to control erosion and runoff from the site and
                            that the applicant will submit a final Site Development application within seven
                            days of  submitting the minor site grading application. All grading activities
                            require compliance with the requirements of the applicable building code and
                            City Public Works standards.
              2.      Class I Sign Permits, and Temporary Sign Permits for 30 days or less.

Supp. No. 3                                                 CD4:58
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.030

              3.      Architectural, landscape, tree removal, grading and building plans that substantially
                     conform to the plans approved by the Development Review Board and/or City Council.
                     The Planning Director's approval of such plans shall apply only to Development Code
                     requirements and shall not alter the authority of the Building Official or City Engineer
                     on these matters.

              4.      Building permits for residential structures in residential zones not subject to Site
                     Design Review, except for multi-family structures with seven or more units, meeting
                     clear and objective zoning, siting, and design standards and located on lots that have
                     been legally created. The Planning Director's approval of such plans shall apply only to
                     Development Code requirements and shall not alter the authority of the Building
                     Official or City Engineer on these matters.

              5.      Lot line adjustments, where none of the lots increase in area by 50 percent or more,
                     subject to the standards specified in Section 4.233.

              6.      A temporary use permit for not more than 30 days. Permitted days may or may not be
                     consecutive, but shall not exceed 30 days within the calendar year for which the permit
                     was applied. Temporary use permits are subject to the following standards:
                     a.      The applicant has the written permission of the property owner to use the site;
                     b.      The proposed use will not create an obstruction within a sight vision clearance
                            area that would impair the vision of motorists entering onto or passing by the
                            property;
                     c.      Adequate parking is provided;
                     d.      Signs shall meet the standards of Section 4.156.09; and
                     e.      The proposed use has the approval of the Fire Marshal.

              7.      Determination that an existing use or structure is a non-conforming use or non-
                     conforming structure, as defined in this Code. Except, however, that the Planning
                     Director may, in cases where there is any uncertainty as to the history of the property,
                     choose to process such determinations through the Class II procedures below.

              8.      Actions taken subject to Site Development Permits which have been approved by the
                     appropriate decision-making body of the City.

              9.      Final plats for condominiums, subdivisions, or partitions that are substantially the
                     same as tentative plats approved by the City and which are submitted for review and
                     signature prior to recordation with the appropriate county.

              10.    Type A tree removal permits as provided in Section 4.600.

              11.    Determination, based upon consultation with the City Attorney, whether a given
                     development application is quasi-judicial or legislative. Except, however, that the
                     Planning Director may, in cases where there is any uncertainty as to the nature of the
                     application, choose to process such determinations through the Class II procedures
                     below.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:59
§ 4.030                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              12.    Expedited land divisions and middle housing land divisions requiring expedited review
                     under state law. Applications for expedited land divisions and middle housing land
                     divisions requiring expedited review under state law, as provided for in Section 4.232 of
                     this Code and ORS Chapter 197 shall be processed without public hearing, and shall be
                     subject to appeal through the special appeal procedures specified in Section 4.232.
                     a.      Authority of Planning Director. The Planning Director shall have authority to
                            review applications for expedited land divisions and middle housing land divi-
                            sions requiring expedited review under state law and to take action approving,
                            approving with conditions, or denying such applications, based on findings of
                            fact.
                     b.      Tentative Plat Requirements for Expedited Land Divisions and middle housing
                            land divisions requiring expedited review under state law. Tentative plats and all
                            other application requirements for expedited land divisions and middle housing
                            land divisions requiring expedited review under state law shall be the same as for
                            other forms of land divisions, except as those requirements are specifically altered
                            by the Oregon Revised Statutes.
                     c.      Administrative Relief Not Available. In taking action on an application for an
                            expedited land division or middle housing land divisions requiring expedited
                            review under state law, the Planning Director is not authorized to grant Variances
                            or waivers from the requirements of the Code.
                     d.      Residential Areas Only. As specified in ORS 197, expedited land divisions shall
                            only be approved in areas zoned for residential use.

              13.    Development approval extensions as provided in Section 4.023.

       B.      A Class II application shall be processed as an administrative action, with or without a public
              hearing, shall require public notice, and shall be subject to appeal or call-up, as noted below.
              Pursuant to Class II procedures set forth in Section 4.035, the Director shall approve, approve
              with conditions, deny, or refer the application to the Development Review Board for a
              hearing:

              1.      Minor alterations to existing buildings or site improvements of less than 25 percent of
                     the previous floor area of a building, but not to exceed 1,250 square feet, or including
                     the addition or removal of not more than ten parking spaces. Minor modifications to
                     approved Architectural and Site Development Plans may also be approved, subject to
                     the same standards.

              2.      Residential accessory buildings or structures with less than 120 square feet of floor area
                     located within the Willamette River Greenway Boundary pursuant to Section 4.500
                     and subject to the flood plain development standards of Section 4.172. Approval of
                     such accessory structures in the Greenway shall be based on all of  the following
                     findings of fact:
                     a.      The building or structure is located so that the maximum amount of landscape
                            area, open space and/or vegetation is provided between the river and the building;

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:60
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.030

                     b.      Public access to the river is preserved or is provided in accordance with an
                            approved and adopted plan; and
                     c.      That the change of use, intensification of use, or development will be directed
                            away from the river to the greatest possible degree while allowing a reasonable use
                            of the property.

              3.      Written interpretations of the text or maps of this Code, the Comprehensive Plan or
                     subelements of the Comprehensive Plan, subject to appeal as provided in Section 4.022.
                     The Planning Director may review and interpret the provisions and standards of
                     Chapter 4 (Planning) of the Wilsonville Code upon receiving the required filing fee
                     along with a specific written request. The Director shall publish and mail notice to
                     affected parties and shall inform the Planning Commission and City Attorney prior to
                     making a final written decision. The Director's letter and notice of decision shall be
                     provided to the applicant, the Planning Commission, the City Council, and City
                     Attorney and the notice shall clearly state that the decision may be appealed in
                     accordance with Section 4.022 (Appeal Procedures). A log of such interpretations shall
                     be kept in the office of the Planning Department for public review.

              4.      A permit to locate an accessory use on a lot adjacent to the site of the principal use.

              5.      Subdivisions located within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District and
                     land partitions, other than expedited land divisions, pursuant to Section 4.210. Ap-
                     proval shall be based on all of the following findings of fact:
                     a.      The applicant has made a complete submittal of materials for the Director to
                            review, as required in Section 4.210;
                     b.      The proposed plan meets the requirements of the Code regarding minimum lot
                            size and yard setbacks;
                     c.      The approval will not impede or adversely affect the orderly development of any
                            adjoining property or access thereto;
                     d.      The public right-of-way bordering the lots or parcels will meet City standards;
                     e.      Any required public dedications of land have been approved for acceptance by
                            the City and will be recorded with the County prior to final plat approval;
                     f.       Adequate easements are proposed where an existing utility line crosses or en-
                            croaches upon any other parcel to be created by the partition;
                     g.      All public utilities and facilities are available or can be provided prior to the
                            issuance of any development permit for any lot or parcel; and
                     h.      Roads extended or created as a result of the land division will meet City stan-
                            dards.

              6.      Decisions on the following:
                     a.      Lot line adjustments, where any of the lots increase by more than 50 percent in
                            area, subject to the provisions of Section 4.233.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:61
§ 4.030                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     b.      Temporary use permits for periods exceeding 30 days but not more than 120 days.
                            Permitted days may or may not be consecutive, but shall not exceed 120 days
                            within the calendar year for which the permit was applied. Temporary use
                            permits may allow specific activities associated with the primary use or business
                            located on the property for up to 120 days provided that:
                            i.       the property owners have given written permission;
                            ii.      no structure, sign or any other object shall exceed 20 feet in height;
                            iii.     adequate parking is provided in designated spaces;
                            iv.     signs shall meet the standards of Section 4.156.09;
                            v.      electrical and building permits are obtained as required;
                            vi.     undue traffic congestion will not result and, if  traffic congestion is ex-
                                    pected, a traffic control plan is submitted along with the application that
                                    identifies the traffic control procedures that will be used;
                            vii.    the activity and/or use shall not unduly interfere with motorists driving on
                                    adjacent roads and streets, including I-5; and
                            viii.   public notice has been provided and the comments of interested parties
                                    have been considered in the action that has been taken;
                            ix.     the proposed use will not create an obstruction within a sight vision
                                    clearance area that would impair the vision of motorists entering onto or
                                    passing by the property; and
                            x.      the proposed use has the approval of the Fire Marshal.
              7.      Solar access permits, as specified in Section 4.137.3.
              8.      Class II Sign Permits.
              9.      Site design review, as authorized in Section 4.400 for properties located within the
                     Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District, which satisfy all applicable standards
                     and adjustment criteria in Section 4.134.10.

              10.    Review of  Stage I and Stage II Planned Development applications for properties
                     located within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District, which satisfy all
                     applicable standards and adjustment criteria in Section 4.134.
              11.    Type B tree removal permits as provided in Section 4.600.
              12.    Type C tree removal permits as provided in Section 4.600 for properties located within
                     the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.
              13.    Architectural and site plans, including modifications and remodels, for multi-family
                     residential structures in residential zones with seven or more units not subject to Site
                     Design Review, meeting clear and objective zoning, siting, and design standards, and
                     located on lots that have previously been legally created. This does not include review of
                     Stage I and Stage II Planned Development Master Plans and Site Design Review of
                     open space and other common improvements, which are subject to review by the
                     Development Review Board.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:62
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.031

      C.     Other specific actions or duties delegated by Planning Commission or Development Review
             Board Resolution, or by order of the Council, setting forth the review procedure guided by
             clear and objective standards for administration.
      D.     Administrative Relief: In issuing the permits in subsection "B," above, the Planning Director
             may grant limited relief  in cases of  hardship. The Director shall follow the Class II—
             Administrative Approval procedures to determine whether administrative relief  shall be
             granted. If the Director receives a complete application, along with the required filing fee,
             and the request involves only the expansion or reduction by not more than 20 percent of one
             or more quantifiable provisions of yard, area, or lot dimension of the zone, the Director may
             approve the application, based upon findings of fact supported by evidence in the record. The
             Variance procedures and standards specified in Section 4.196 shall be used in determining
             whether administrative relief shall be granted.
      E.     Emergency Situations: The Planning Director may review and approve any reasonable and
             necessary emergency measure, including the removal of  trees and vegetation from the
             Willamette River Greenway, Significant Resource Overlay Zone and wetlands, necessary for
             the safety and/or protection of persons or property. The standard shall be that the least
             amount of activity or disruption is used to provide the necessary protection to the property
             or to avert damage to the property. The Director may require restoration of landscaping,
             vegetation or soil to repair any damage resulting from enacting emergency protection
             measures.

(.02)  Authority of Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall
      serve as the City's Flood Plain Administrator and shall have specific additional authority as
      follows:
      A.     Reviewing proposed site development applications to assure compliance with the require-
             ments of Section 4.172 (Flood Plain Regulations);
      B.      Reviewing proposed site development applications to determine whether sufficient informa-
             tion exists to waive the requirement of a traffic study.
      C.     Reviewing and determining the adequacy of security provided in lieu of improvements for a
             development.
      D.     Reviewing final plats for compliance with conditions of  approval and City engineering
             standards.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018;
Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023; Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A),
8-4-2025)

Section  4.031.  Authority of the Development Review Board.

(.01)  As specified in Chapter 2 of the Wilsonville Code and except as specified herein, the Board shall
      have authority to act on the following types of applications:
      A.     Class II development applications referred to the Board by the Planning Director, as
             authorized in Section 4.030.

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:63
§ 4.031                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       B.      Call-ups or appeals of staff decisions or interpretations involving quasi-judicial applications
              or procedures, as authorized in Sections 4.022 and 4.172.
       C.     Review of tentative subdivision and condominium plats, as authorized in Section 4.210,
              other than those processed as expedited land divisions.
       D.     Conditional Use Permits, as authorized in Section 4.184.
       E.     Variances, as authorized in Section 4.196, other than those that are reviewed and acted upon
              by the Planning Director through Administrative Review processes.
       F.      Initial review of quasi-judicial applications for zone changes, as authorized in Section 4.197.
       G.     Initial review of quasi-judicial applications for amendments to one or maps in the Compre-
              hensive Plan, as authorized in Section 4.198.
       H.     Site design review, as authorized in Section 4.400.
       I.      Review of Stage I and Stage II Planned Development applications.
       J.       Acceptance, rejection, or modification of traffic studies prepared for projects or develop-
              ments. A traffic study prepared by the City's consultant shall not be rejected or modified by
              the Board unless substantial evidence exists in the record to justify such action. If the Board
              rejects a traffic study prepared by the City's consultant, the fee paid by the applicant for that
              study shall be refunded.
       K.     Initial review of requests for quasi-judicial annexations to the City of Wilsonville.
       L.     Street vacations, where a specific development application has been filed for the subject
              property. If no specific development application has been filed for the subject property, the
              vacation request shall be considered by the Planning Commission. Action of the Planning
              Commission or Board on a street vacation request shall be a recommendation to the City
              Council.
       M.    Class III Sign Permits, Master Sign Plans, and all sign permits and approvals not specifically
              authorized for administrative review or exempt from permitting requirements.
(.02)  Once an application is determined or deemed to be complete pursuant to Section 4.011, it shall be
       scheduled for public hearing before the Development Review Board. The City shall provide public
       notice of the hearing as specified in Section 4.012.
(.03)  At the public hearing, the staff, any applicant, and interested persons may present information
       relevant to the policies, criteria and standards pertinent to the proposal, giving reasons why the
       application should or should not be approved or proposing modifications or conditions and the
       reasons the person believes they are necessary for approval. The hearing body shall make a finding
       for each of the applicable policies, criteria and standards, including whether the proposal conforms
       to the Comprehensive Plan. The decision, including findings of the hearing body shall be adopted
       by Resolution, setting forth all Conditions of Approval and relevant time periods for compliance
       with said conditions.
       A.     If the application is approved, that approval shall constitute a Development Permit when the
              applicant has complied with the other requirements of this Chapter or the applicant has filed
              with the Planning Director a written agreement to comply with all conditions of approval.

Supp. No. 6                                                 CD4:64
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.033

       B.      A decision of the Board may be appealed to the City Council by any party to the hearing in
              accordance with Section 4.022.
(Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012)

Section  4.032.  Authority of the Planning Commission.

(.01)  As specified in Chapter 2 of the Wilsonville Code, the Planning Commission sits as an advisory
       body, making recommendations to the City Council on a variety of land use and transportation
       policy issues. The Commission also serves as the City's official Committee for Citizen Involvement
       and shall have the authority to review and make recommendations on the following types of
       applications or procedures:
       A.     Legislative zone changes and changes to the text of Chapter 4 of this Code;
       B.      Legislative changes to, or adoption of new elements or sub-elements of, the Comprehensive
              Plan;
       C.     Initial review of requests for legislative annexations to the City of Wilsonville; and
       D.     Street vacations, where no specific development application has been filed for the subject
              property. If a specific development application has been filed for the subject property, the
              vacation request shall be considered by the Development Review Board. Action of  the
              Planning Commission or Board on a street vacation request shall be a recommendation to
              the City Council.

Section  4.033.  Authority of City Council.

(01.)  Upon appeal, the City Council shall have final authority to act on all applications filed pursuant
       to Chapter 4 of  the Wilsonville Code, with the exception of  applications for expedited land
       divisions and middle housing divisions requiring expedited review under state law, as specified

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:64.1

                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.033

      Section 4.232. Additionally, the Council shall have final authority to interpret and enforce the
      proceduresandstandardssetforthinthisChapterandshallhavefinaldecision-makingauthority
      on the following:

      A.     Applicationsforzonechangesandchangestothetextof Chapter4,asauthorizedinSection
             4.197.

      B.      Applicationsforamendmentsto,oradoptionof newelementsorsub-elementsto,themaps
             or text of the Comprehensive Plan, as authorized in Section 4.198.

      C.     Appeals of any action taken by the Development Review Board, as authorized in Section
             4.022.

      D.     Items called up from the Development Review Board by the City Council, as authorized in
             Section 4.022.

      E.     Consideration of the recommendations of the Planning Commission.

      F.      Review of requests for annexations to the City of Wilsonville.

      G.     Recommendations to the Metro Council on proposed changes to the portion of the Urban
             Growth Boundary adjoining Wilsonville.

      H.     Final actions on street vacation applications.

(.02)  When a decision or approval of the Council is required, the Planning Director shall schedule a
      publichearingpursuanttoSection4.013.Atthepublichearingthestaff shallreviewthereportof
      the Planning Commission or Development Review Board and provide other pertinent informa-
      tion, and interested persons shall be given the opportunity to present testimony and information
      relevant to the proposal and make final arguments why the matter shall not be approved and, if
      approved, the nature of the provisions to be contained in approving action.

(.03)  To the extent that a finding of fact is required, the Council shall make a finding for each of the
      criteriaapplicableandindoingsomaysustainorreverseafindingof thePlanningCommissionor
      Development Review Board. The Council may delete, add or modify any of  the provisions
      pertainingtotheproposalorattachcertaindevelopmentoruseconditionsbeyondthosewarranted
      forcompliancewithstandardsingrantinganapprovalif theCouncildeterminestheconditionsare
      appropriate to fulfill the criteria for approval.

(.04)  Totheextentthatapolicyistobeestablishedorrevised,theCouncilshallmakeitsdecisionafter
      informationfromthehearinghasbeenreceived.Thedecisionshallbecomeeffectivebypassageof
      an Ordinance, Resolution or order.

(.05)  Legislative enactments not restricted. Nothing in Sections 4.030 through 4.035 shall limit the
      authorityof theCounciltomakechangesindistrictdesignationsorrequirementsaspartof some
      more extensive revision of the Comprehensive Plan, an implementing ordinance or development
      standards or relieve a use or development from compliance with other applicable laws.

                                                       CD4:65
§ 4.034                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.034. Application Requirements.

Applications shall be reviewed as follows:

      (.01)  Azonechangeshallbereviewedinaccordancewiththestandardsandproceduressetforth
             in Section 4.197.

      (.02)  Applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be reviewed in accordance with the stan-
             dards and procedures set forth in Section 4.184.

      (.03)  Applications for Variances shall be reviewed in accordance with the standards and proce-
             dures set forth in Section 4.196.

      (.04)  ApplicationsforPlannedDevelopmentApprovalsshallbereviewedinaccordancewiththe
             standards and procedures set forth in Section 4.035.

      (.05)  Applications for subdivisions, condominium divisions, lot line adjustments and land parti-
             tionsshallbereviewedinaccordancewiththestandardsandproceduressetforthinSection
             4.210.

      (.06)  Applications for Site Development Permits shall be reviewed in accordance with the stan-
             dards and procedures set forth in Section 4.035:

      (.07)  Applications for street vacations shall be reviewed in accordance with the standards and
             procedures set forth in ORS 271.

      (.08)  ApplicationsfordevelopmentapprovalswithintheVillagezoneshallbereviewedinaccor-
             dance with the standards and procedures set forth in Section 4.125.
(Ord. Mo. 557, 9-5-2003)

Section  4.035. Site Development Permits.

(.01)  ProceduresforProcessingSiteDevelopmentPermit.

      A.     Unless the matter is subject to a public hearing process for a land development permit, an
             application for a Site Development Permit shall be processed through a Class I or II
             procedure as set forth below.

      B.      When an application and proposed development plan is submitted, the Planning Director
             shalldeterminetheappropriateprocedurespecifiedbytheCode,togetherwiththedetermi-
             nation of  affected departments, public agencies and property owners. Where there is a
             question as to the appropriate type of procedure, the Director may elect to process the
             application as a Class II Administrative Review item.

      C.     ThePlanningDirectorshallberesponsibleforthecoordinationof theDevelopmentPermit
             applicationanddecision-makingprocedureandshallonlyissueaDevelopmentPermittoan
             applicantwhoseapplicationandproposeddevelopmentarefoundtobeincompliancewith
             all of the applicable provisions set forth in the Comprehensive Plan and Chapter 4 of this
             Code.BeforeissuingtheDevelopmentPermit,theDirectorshallbeprovidedwiththedetail
             required to establish full compliance with the requirements of this Code.

                                                       CD4:66
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.035

(.02)  ClassI—AdministrativeReview.  ConsistentwiththeauthoritysetforthinSection4.030,aClassI
      application shall be processed without a public hearing or public notice, unless otherwise specifi-
      cally required by this Code.

      A.     Within 30 days of the date of receiving a complete Class I application, pursuant to Section
             4.011, the Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Development Permit.
             The decision of the Director shall be based upon the application, the evidence, comments
             from referral agencies, and approvals required by others. The Director shall notify the
             applicant in writing of the disposition of the application. The notice shall indicate the date
             that the decision will take effect and describe the right of appeal pursuant to Section 4.022.

      B.      The Development Permit shall be approved if applicable approvals by others have been
             granted and the proposed development otherwise conforms to the requirements of  the
             Comprehensive Plan, and the remainder of Chapter 4.
             1.      TheDevelopmentPermitshallbedeniedif requiredapprovalsarenotobtainedorthe
                    applicationotherwisefailstocomplywithCoderequirements.Thenoticeshalldescribe
                    the reason for denial.
             2.      Upon taking action on a Class I Permit application, the Planning Director shall mail
                    noticeof thedecisiontotheapplicant.Adecisionof thePlanningDirectorunderthis
                    procedure may be appealed by the applicant in accordance with Sections 4.022 and
                    4.030.Thehearingontheappealshallbeareviewof therecordsupplementedbyoral
                    commentary relevant to the record presented on behalf  of  the applicant and the
                    Planning Director.

(.03)  ClassII—AdministrativeReview.  ConsistentwiththeauthoritysetforthinSection4.030,aClass
      IIapplicationshallbeprocessedwithoutapublichearing,exceptasdeterminedappropriatebythe
      Director.

      A.     Within ten calendar days of receiving a complete Class II Permit application, the Planning
             Director shall mail notice of the proposed development, pursuant to Section 4.012, to all
             property owners within 250 feet of the proposal. The notice shall summarize the standards
             and criteria that will be used to evaluate the application and shall be sent to the persons
             designated to receive notice by the relevant sections of this Code. The notice shall invite
             personstosubmitinformationwithintencalendardays,relevanttothestandardspertinent
             totheproposalandgivingreasonswhytheapplicationshouldorshouldnotbeapprovedor
             proposing conditions the person believes are necessary for approval according to the stan-
             dards. The notice shall also advise the person of the right to appeal the decision on the
             proposed development if the person's concerns are not resolved.

      B.      If theDirectoranticipatesthatpersonsotherthantheapplicantcanbeexpectedtoquestion
             the application's compliance with the Comprehensive Plan or Development Standards, the
             Planning Director may initiate a public hearing.

      C.     Withintencalendardaysof thefinalresponsedate,theDirectorshallreviewanyinformation
             receivedunderSubsection"A",above,andmakeamakeafinaldecision.Thefinaldecision
             and supporting findings shall be forwarded to the applicant, affected parties required to be

                                                       CD4:67
§ 4.035                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             notified, and the Development Review Board. The decision shall be based upon a determi-
             nation of whether the application complies with the standards and criteria listed above for
             Class I Administrative Reviews and the following additional standards:
             1.      Theproposeddevelopmentoruse,includingsignage,iscompatiblewithdevelopments
                    or uses permitted in the zone;
             2.      The proposed development or use will not create a nuisance or result in a significant
                    reduction in the value or usefulness of adjacent properties;
             3.      If theproposeduseistobetemporary,thelengthof timeforwhichitispermittedshall
                    be reasonable in terms of the purpose and nature of the use that is proposed;
             4.      If the application involves a Variance, it shall be subject to the standards and criteria
                    listed in Section 4.196;
             5.      All of the relevant application filing requirements of Chapter 4 have been met.
      D.     A decision of the Planning Director under a Class II procedure may be appealed by an
             affected party or may be called up for review by the Development Review Board, provided
             such action is taken by members of either panel of the Board as specified in Section 4.022.
      E.     The Development Review Board, Planning Commission, or City Council may delegate
             specific actions or duties to be executed by the Planning Director. The body making the
             delegationshallspecifytheadministrativereviewproceduresthattheDirectoristofollowin
             the process.

(.04)  SiteDevelopmentPermitApplication.
      A.     An application for a Site Development Permit shall consist of the materials specified as
             follows, plus any other materials required by this Code.
             1.      A completed Permit application form, including identification of the project coordi-
                    nator, or professional design team.
             2.      Anexplanationof intent,statingthenatureof theproposeddevelopment,reasonsfor
                    the Permit request, pertinent background information, information required by the
                    developmentstandardsandotherinformationspecifiedbytheDirectorasrequiredby
                    other sections of this Code because of the type of development proposal or the area
                    involvedorthatmayhaveabearingindeterminingtheactiontobetaken.Asnotedin
                    Section4.014,theapplicantbearstheburdenof provingthattheapplicationmeetsall
                    requirements of this Code.
             3.      Proof thatthepropertyaffectedbytheapplicationisintheexclusiveownershipof the
                    applicant, or that the applicant has the consent of  all individuals or partners in
                    ownership of the affected property.
             4.      Legal description of the property affected by the application.
             5.      Theapplicationshallincludeconceptualandquantitativelyaccuraterepresentationsof
                    the entire development sufficient to judge the scope, size and impact of the develop-
                    ment on the community, public facilities and adjacent properties; and except as
                    otherwise specified in this Code, shall be accompanied by the following information,

                                                         CD4:68
                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.035

6.      UnlessspecificallywaivedbytheDirector,thesubmittalshallinclude:tencopiesfolded
      to 9" × 12" or (one set of full-sized scaled drawings and nine 8½" × 11" reductions of
      larger drawings) of  the proposed Site Development Plan, including a small scale
      vicinity map and showing:
      a.      Streets, private drives, driveways, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, off-street parking,
             loading areas, garbage and recycling storage areas, power lines and railroad
             tracks, and shall indicate the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-street
             parking and loading areas, the location of each parking space and each loading
             berth and areas of turning and maneuvering vehicles.
      b.      The Site Plan shall indicate how utility service, including sanitary sewer, water
             and storm drainage, are to be provided. The Site Plan shall also show the
             following off-site features: distances from the subject property to any structures
             on adjacent properties and the locations and uses of streets, private drives, or
             driveways on adjacent properties.
      c.      Locationanddimensionsof structures,utilizationof structures,includingactiv-
             ities and the number of living units.
      d.      Majorexistinglandscapingfeaturesincludingtreestobesaved,andexistingand
             proposed contours.

      e.      Relevant operational data, drawings and/or elevations clearly establishing the
             scale, character and relationship of buildings, streets, private drives, and open
             space.
      f.       Topographic information sufficient to determine direction and percentage of
             slopes,drainagepatterns,andinenvironmentallysensitiveareas,e.g.,floodplain,
             forested areas, steep slopes or adjacent to stream banks, the elevations of all
             pointsusedtodeterminecontoursshallbeindicatedandsaidpointsshallbegiven
             to true elevation above mean sea level as determined by the City Engineer. The
             base data shall be clearly indicated and shall be compatible to City datum, if
             bench marks are not adjacent. The following intervals shall be shown:
             i.       One foot contours for slopes of up to five percent;
             ii.      Two foot contours for slopes of from six percent to 12 percent;
             iii.     Fivefootcontoursforslopesof from12percentto20percent.Theseslopes
                    shall be clearly identified, and
             iv.     Ten foot contours for slopes exceeding 20 percent.

      g.      Atabulationof landarea,insquarefeet,devotedtovarioususessuchasbuilding
             area (gross and net rentable), parking and paving coverage, landscaped area
             coverage and average residential density per net acre.
      h.      An application fee as set by the City Council.
      i.       If there are trees in the development area, an arborist's report, as required in
             Section 4.600. This report shall also show the impacts of grading on the trees.

                                           CD4:69
§ 4.035                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    j.       Alistof allownersof propertywithin250feetof thesubjectproperty,printedon
                          label format. The list is to be based on the latest available information from the
                          County Assessor.
(.05)  CompleteSubmittalRequired. Application materials shall be submitted to the Planning Director
      whoshallhavethedateof submissionindicatedoneachcopysubmitted.Within30calendardays
      fromthedateof submission,theDirectorshalldeterminewhetheranapplicationiscomplete.An
      application is not complete unless accompanied by a traffic study, as prescribed by the City
      Engineer; except in cases where the requirement of a traffic study has been specifically waived by
      the Community Development Director.
      A.     If theDirectordeterminesthattheapplicationisincompleteorotherwisedoesnotconform
             to the provisions of  this Code, the applicant shall immediately be notified in writing,
             conveying an explanation and a submittal deadline for completion or correction of the
             application. If  the applicant fails or refuses to provide the necessary information, the
             applicationwillbeprocessedasspecifiedinSection4.011(HowApplicationsAreProcessed)
             in order to assure that statutory time limits are met.
      B.      If anapplicationisdeterminedtobecompleteandinconformancewiththeprovisionsof this
             Ordinance, the Director shall accept it and note the date of acceptance on the application
             form.TheDirectorshallthenscheduletheappropriatereviewandnotifytheapplicantof the
             date of the final decision or hearing as set forth in this Chapter.
      C.     Materials submitted to the Planning Department staff after the preparation of the staff
             report shall be date-stamped and passed on to the appropriate decision makers. If there is
             insufficienttimeforthestaff toprepareananalysisof suchinformation,thedecision-makers
             may choose to postpone action until such an analysis can be completed. If statutory time
             limitsforactionontheapplicationprecludepostponement,thedecisionmakersmayrequest
             asummaryof thenewinformationfromthepartypresentingit.If informationisreceivedtoo
             latetobeadequatelyevaluatedwithinthelegaltimelimitsforactionontheapplication,the
             decision-makers shall so state and shall make the decision, indicating within the adopted
             findings of  fact the extent to which that information was considered in rendering the
             decision.
      D.     Written testimony that is sent via mail, facsimile, or computer and received by the City
             RecorderortheRecorder'sdesigneepriortoapublichearingshallbeincludedintherecord
             and considered to be originals, provided the document bears the name of  the person
             testifying. Persons sending such documents shall be responsible for verifying that the
             documentshavebeenreceivedbytheintendedrecipientonCitystaff.TheCitywillmakeall
             reasonable attempts to convert testimony sent by telecommunication to paper format but
             bears no responsibility for doing so.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

                                                       ZONING

Section  4.100. Zoning—Purpose.
Sections 4.100 to 4.199 of this Code are enacted for the purpose of promoting public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare; to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to provide adequate light

                                                       CD4:70
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.110

andair;topreventovercrowdingof land;toavoidundueconcentrationof population;toprovideproper
drainage; to facilitate adequate and economical provision of public improvements and services, and to
conserve,stabilize,andprotectpropertyvalues;allinaccordancewiththeStatewidePlanningGoalsand
the City's Comprehensive Plan. The purpose is further to provide a method of administration and to
prescribepenaltiesforviolationsof provisionshereafterdescribed—allasauthorizedbytheprovisions
of Oregon Revised Statues.

Section  4.101. Zoning—Interpretation.

The provisions of Sections 4.100 to 4.199, shall be construed as the minimum requirements for the
promotionof thepublicsafety,healthandgeneralwelfare.TheseSectionsarenotintendedtointerfere
with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided,
however,thatwheretheseSectionsimposeagreaterrestrictionupontheuseof buildingsorpremisesor
upontheheightof buildings,orrequirelargerspacethanisimposedorrequiredbyotherCodeSections,
rules or regulation, or by easement, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these Sections shall
govern.

Section  4.102. Zoning—Official Zoning Map.

(.01)  TheCityisherebydividedintobasezonesorzoningdistricts,andoverlayzones,asshownonthe
      Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
      reference and declared to be a part of this Code.

(.02)  The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City
      Recorder, together with the date of the adoption of this Code.

(.03)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon
      except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Code. Any unauthorized change of
      whateverkindbyanypersonorpersonsshallbeconsideredaviolationof thisCodeandpunishable
      as provided by law.

(.04)  Regardlessof theexistenceof purportedcopiesof theOfficialZoningMapwhichmay,fromtime
      totime,bemadeorpublished,theOfficialZoningMap,whichshallbelocatedintheOfficeof the
      Planning Director, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water
      areas, building, and other structures in the City.

(.05)  Theperimeterboundariesof theOfficialZoningMapandtheCityareintendedtobeidenticalto
      eachotheratalltimes,exceptwhenpropertieshavebeenannexedtotheCityandnotyetzonedby
      the City. New developments in such areas shall require completion of the zone change process
      before proceeding.

Section  4.110. Zoning—Zones.

(.01)  The following Base Zones are established by this Code:

      A.     Residential Agricultural H Holding, which shall be designated "RA-H".

      B.      Residential, which shall be designated "R".

                                                      CD4:71
§ 4.110                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      C.     Planned Development Residential, which shall be designated "PDR," and further divided
             into:
             PDR-1
             PDR-2

             PDR-3
             PDR-4
             PDR-5
             PDR-6
             PDR-7

      D.     Planned Development Commercial, which shall be designated "PDC."

      E.     Planned Development Industrial, which shall be designated "PDI."

      F.      Public Facility, which shall be designated "PF."

      G.     Public Facility - Corrections, which shall be designated "PF-C."

      H.     Village, which shall be designated "V".

      I.      Residential Neighborhood, which shall be designated "RN". The RN zone is a Planned
             Development Residential zone.

      J.       TownCenter,whichshallbedesignated"TC".TheTCzoneisaPlannedDevelopmentzone.

(.02)  The following Overlay Zones, to be used in combination with the underlying base zones, are
      established by this Code.

      A.     Solar-Friendly (S) overlay zone;

      B.      Screening and Buffering (SB) overlay zone;

      C.     Old Town (O) overlay zone; and

      D.     Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District (CCDOD).

(.03)  Theuseof anybuildingorpremisesortheconstructionof anydevelopmentshallbeinconformity
      withtheregulationssetforthinthisCodeforeachZoningDistrictinwhichitislocated,exceptas
      provided in Sections 4.189 through 4.192.

(.04)  TheGeneralRegulationslistedinSections4.150through4.199shallapplytoallzonesunlessthe
      text indicates otherwise.
(Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Section  4.111. Zoning—Zone Boundary Lines.

(.01)  Exceptwherereferenceismadeonsaidmaptoastreetline,politicalboundary,sectionline,legal
      description,orotherdesignatedlinebydimensionsshownonsaidmapormaps,thezoneboundary

                                                       CD4:72
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.113

       lines are intended to follow property lines, lot lines, or centerlines of streets, private drives, alleys,
       streams, or railroads or the extension of such lines as they existed at the time of the adoption of this
       Code.

(.02)  Questions concerning the exact location of  zone boundary lines shall be determined by the
       Planning Director, who may seek the advice of the City Attorney and/or Planning Commission in
       making the determination.

(.03)  Whenever any public way is vacated by official action as provided by law, the zone adjoining the
       side of such public way shall be automatically extended, depending on the side or sides to which
       such lands revert, to include the right-of-way thus vacated, which shall thenceforth be subject to all
       regulations of the extended zone or zones.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

Section  4.113.  Standards Applying to Residential Developments in any Zone.

(.01)  Open Space:

       A.     Purpose. The purposes of the following standards for open space are to provide adequate
              light, air, open space and usable recreational facilities to occupants of  each residential
              development.

       B.      Applicability and Review.

              1.      The open space standards of this subsection shall apply to all residential development
                     with the following exceptions:
                     a.      Partitions for non-Multi-family development. However, serial or adjacent parti-
                            tions shall not be used to avoid the open space requirements.
                     b.      Development within a previously approved Stage II Planned Development area
                            so long as the Gross Development Area of the Stage II Planned Development
                            area does not increase, the land being developed was previously designated for
                            residential development, and there is no decrease in area of  the previously
                            approved required open space.

              2.      The amount and location of open space required in this subsection is determined at the
                     time of Stage II Final Plan review.

              3.      The design of required open space is reviewed through Site Design Review.

       C.     Area Required. The minimum open space area required in a development is an area equal to
              25 percent of the size of the Gross Development Area except if reduced for shared parking
              pursuant to Subsection 4.155(.03)S.

       D.     Required Open Space Characteristics:

              1.      Size of Individual Open Spaces. For developments with ten or more lots buildable with
                     dwelling units (or ten or more multi-family units) an open space area must be at least
                     2,000 square feet to be counted towards the 25 percent open space requirement. For

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:73
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     developments with less than ten lots buildable with dwelling units (or less than ten
                     multi-family units) an open space area must be at least 1,000 square feet to be counted
                     towards the 25 percent open space requirement.
              2.      Types of Open Space and Ownership. The following types of areas count towards the
                     minimum open space requirement if they are or will be owned by the City, a homeown-
                     ers' association or similar joint ownership entity, or the property owner for Multi-
                     family Development.
                     a.      Preserved wetlands and their buffers, natural and/or treed areas, including those
                            within the SROZ
                     b.      New natural/wildlife habitat areas
                     c.      Non-fenced vegetated stormwater features outside the public right-of-way
                     d.      Play areas and play structures
                     e.      Open grass area for recreational play
                     f.       Swimming and wading areas
                     g.      Other areas similar to a. through f. that are [publicly] accessible
                     h.      Walking paths besides required sidewalks in the public right-of-way or along a
                            private drive.
              3.      Usable open space requirements. Half of the minimum open space area, an area equal to
                     12.5 percent of the size of the Gross Development Area, shall be located outside the
                     SROZ and be usable open space programmed for active recreational use. Any open
                     space considered usable open space programmed for active recreation use shall meet the
                     following requirements.
                     a.      Be designed by a registered professional landscape architect with experience
                            designing residential park areas. An affidavit of such professional's credentials
                            shall be included in the development application material.
                     b.      Be designed and programmed for a variety of age groups or other user groups.
              4.      Enhancing Existing Wildlife Habitat through Design of Open Space:
                     a.      Open space designed, as wildlife habitat shall be placed adjacent to and connect
                            to existing, preserved wildlife habitat to the extent feasible.
                     b.      To the extent feasible, open space shall create or enhance connections between
                            existing wildlife habitat.

       E.     Any dedication of land as public park land must meet City parks standards. The square
              footage of any open space land outside the SROZ and BPA easements, whether dedicated to
              the public or not, shall be considered part of the Gross Development Area.

       F.      Approval of open space must ensure the long-term protection and maintenance of open
              space and/or recreational areas. Where such protection or maintenance are the responsibility
              of a private party or homeowners' association, the City Attorney shall review any pertinent
              bylaws, covenants, or agreements prior to recordation.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:74
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.113

       G.     The open space requirements of this subjection are subject to adjustments in PDR zones
              pursuant to Subsection 4.124(.08).

(.02)  Building Setbacks (for Fence Setbacks, see subsection .08). The following provisions apply unless
       otherwise provided for by the Code or a legislative master plan.

       A.     For lots over 10,000 square feet:
              1.      Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
              2.      Minimum side yard setback: Ten feet. In the case of a corner lot less than 100 feet in
                     width, abutting more than one street or tract with a private drive, the side yard on the
                     street or private drive side of such lot shall be not less than 20 percent of the width of
                     the lot, but not less than ten feet.
              3.      In the case of a key lot, the front setback shall equal one-half the sum of depth of the
                     required yard on the adjacent corner lot along the street or tract with a private drive
                     upon which the key lot faces and the setback required on the adjacent interior lot.
              4.      No structure shall be erected within the required setback for any future street shown
                     within the City's adopted Transportation Master Plan or Transportation Systems Plan.
              5.      Minimum setback to garage door or carport entry: 20 feet. Except, however, in the case
                     of an alley where garages or carports may be located no less than four feet from the
                     property line adjoining the alley.
              6.      Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. Accessory buildings on corner lots must observe
                     the same rear setbacks as the required side yard of the abutting lot.
              7.      Cottage Cluster and ADU Setbacks: Setbacks in 1.—3. and 6. above do not apply to
                     cottage clusters and ADUs. For cottage clusters and ADUs, minimum front, rear, and
                     side setbacks are ten feet. Where an ADU is adjacent to an alley, it may meet the same
                     setback as a garage taking alley access as established in 5. above. Garage setbacks in 5.
                     above continue to apply regardless of relationship to a Cottage Cluster or ADU.
              8.      Townhouse Setbacks: No setback is required along property lines where townhouses
                     are attached.

       B.      For lots not exceeding 10,000 square feet:
              1.      Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet, with open porches allowed to extend to within ten
                     feet of the property line.
              2.      Minimum side yard setback: One story: five feet; Two or more stories: seven feet. In the
                     case of a corner lot, abutting more than one street or tract with a private drive, the side
                     yard on the street side of such lot shall be not less than ten feet.
              3.      In the case of a key lot, the front setback shall equal one-half the sum of depth of the
                     required yard on the adjacent corner lot along the street or tract with a private drive
                     upon which the key lot faces and the setback required on the adjacent interior lot.
              4.      No structure shall be erected within the required setback for any future street shown
                     within the City's adopted Transportation Master Plan or Transportation Systems Plan.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:75
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              5.      Minimum setback to garage door or carport entry: 20 feet. Wall above the garage door
                     may project to within 15 feet of property line, provided that clearance to garage door is
                     maintained. Where access is taken from an alley, garages or carports may be located no
                     less than four feet from the property line adjoining the alley.
              6.      Minimum rear yard setback: One story: 15 feet. Two or more stories: 20 feet. Accessory
                     buildings on corner lots must observe the same rear setbacks as the required side yard
                     of the abutting lot.
              7.      Cottage Cluster and ADU Setbacks: Any minimum setback in 1.—3. or 6. above that
                     would exceed ten feet for a cottage cluster or ADU shall be ten feet. Where an ADU is
                     adjacent to an alley, it may meet the same setback as a garage taking alley access as
                     established in 5. above. Garage setbacks in 5. above continue to apply regardless of
                     relationship to a Cottage Cluster or ADU.
              8.      Townhouse Setbacks: No setback is required along property lines where townhouses
                     are attached.

(.03)  Height Guidelines. The Development Review Board may regulate heights as follows:

       A.     Restrict or regulate the height or building design consistent with adequate provision of fire
              protection and fire-fighting apparatus height limitations.

       B.      To provide buffering of low density developments by requiring the placement of buildings
              more than two stories in height away from the property lines abutting a low density zone.

       C.     To regulate building height or design to protect scenic vistas of Mt. Hood or the Willamette
              River from greater encroachments than would occur if developed conventionally.

(.04)  Residential uses for treatment or training:

       A.     Residential Homes, as defined in Section 4.001, shall be permitted in any location where a
              single-family dwelling is permitted.

       B.      Residential Facilities, as defined in Section 4.001, shall be permitted in any location where
              multiple-family dwelling units are permitted.

(.05)  Residential Stormwater Design Standards:

       A.     Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to protect the public health and welfare by
              appropriate management of stormwater to prevent flooding and property damage, and the
              pollution of streams, groundwater, wetlands, and other natural water features through the
              use of low impact development design and decentralized stormwater treatment and flow
              control as required by the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
              Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit. The purpose of these standards,
              further, is to thoughtfully integrate the design of stormwater management facilities into the
              overall design of neighborhoods in a manner that mimics the predevelopment hydrology by
              treating and controlling the stormwater as close to the source as practicable. These standards
              work in concert with related Public Works Standards and intend to better integrate the Public
              Works Standards requirements with land use planning and site layout.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:76
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.113

       B.      Low Impact Development. All stormwater management facilities for treatment and flow
              control related to residential development shall follow low impact development design
              standards as described herein and in the City's Public Works Standards.

       C.     Ownership and Maintenance. All stormwater management facilities shall be owned and
              maintained by a homeowners association or similar entity and are subject to ownership and
              maintenance agreements with the City.

       D.     Sizing. Stormwater management facility sizing requirements shall be determined in accor-
              dance with the City's Public Works Standards. Use of impervious area reduction strategies in
              the Public Works Standards, including pervious hard surfaces and green roofs and tree
              credits, is encouraged.

       E.     Locating. Stormwater management facilities are required to be dispersed and integrated with
              development in order for stormwater to be managed and treated close to the source mimick-
              ing predevelopment hydrology. Stormwater management facilities shall be located pursuant
              to 1. and 2. below while considering conflicting uses pursuant to 3. below. See also Subsection
              (.01) D. for the extent stormwater management facilities can be counted as required open
              space. No stormwater management facilities shall be counted as required usable open space
              in (.01) D. 3 unless a waiver is granted pursuant to Subsection G.

              1.      High Priority Locations. Stormwater management facilities at locations listed a. through
                     g. in no particular order shall, at minimum, have a combined surface area equal to the
                     required sizing pursuant to Subsection D or ten percent of  new and redeveloped
                     impervious surface in the development, whichever is less.
                     a.      Street medians;
                     b.      Planter strips;
                     c.      Curb extensions or bulb outs on streets;
                     d.      Shoulder/planter areas up to 12 feet wide, as measured from the top of the facility,
                            along midblock bike and pedestrian connections, and along other off-street trails;
                     e.      Facilities up to 12 feet wide, as measured from the top of the facility, around the
                            edges of or within parks and open space;
                     f.       Separate tracts for stormwater management facilities that are either:
                            i.       No more than 12 feet in width, as measured from the top of the facility; or
                            ii.      Sized to serve an area no larger than four acres.
                     g.      Private yard areas on lots so long as all the following criteria are met:
                            i.       A stormwater management facility is not more than 12 feet wide, as
                                   measured from the top of the facility;
                            ii.      Foundations of habitable structures are not within five feet of a stormwater
                                   management facility; and
                            iii.     The yard area with the stormwater management facility is unfenced is
                                   visible and accessible from the street.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:77
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Low priority. If additional stormwater management facilities are needed after meeting
                     the minimum surface area requirement in 1. above, the following locations can also be
                     used:
                     a.      Landscaped areas within five feet of multi-family residential and commercial
                             building foundations; and
                     b.      Separate tracts for stormwater facilities besides those considered high priority
                             under 1.f. above.
              3.      Conflicting Uses To Be Located Prior to Stormwater Facilities. When locating stormwater
                     facilities, particularly in locations 1.a., b. above, the locating of the following uses,
                     according to established standards, shall occur prior to locating stormwater facilities
                     on land not occupied by one of these uses.
                     a.      Street lights and other required lighting, including a buffer around the base of the
                             light as required by Portland General Electric;
                     b.      Street trees and other required landscape trees, including associated mounds as
                             established in the Public Works standards;
                     c.      Driveways and associated curb cuts; and
                     d.      Pedestrian walkways and bicycle paths.
              4.      While not required to be located prior to stormwater facilities, the applicant is encour-
                     aged to plan for locating other potential conflicting uses when locating stormwater
                     facilities to avoid later design changes to stormwater facilities. Such potential conflict-
                     ing uses include but are not limited to: fire hydrants and fire department connections
                     (FDCs); mailboxes; utility access structures, clean outs, pedestals, and vaults for public
                     and franchise utilities; and public utility easements for gas, electricity, and communi-
                     cation.

       F.      Prohibited Design Elements. To support the integration of stormwater facilities into site
              design, the following design elements are prohibited unless they are approved by the City
              Engineer, or designee, as part of a waiver request;
              1.      Fences
              2.      Retaining walls over two feet in height as measured from the bottom of the footing to
                     the top of the wall.

       G.     Waivers to the Standards of this Subsection. Waivers to the Residential Stormwater Design
              Standards in this Subsection shall be processed by the City Engineer, or designee, pursuant to
              Wilsonville Code Section 8.130 and are not subject to waiver review by the Development
              Review Board as established in Sections 4.118.

(.06)  Signs. Signs shall be governed by the provisions of Sections 4.156.01—4.156.11.

(.07)  Fences:

       A.     The maximum height of a sight-obscuring fence located in the required front yard of a
              residential development shall not exceed four feet.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:78
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.113

       B.      The maximum height of a sight-obscuring fence located in the side yard of a residential lot
              shall not exceed four feet forward of the building line and shall not exceed six feet in height in
              the rear yard, except as approved by the Development Review Board. Except, however, that
              a fence in the side yard of residential corner lot may be up to six feet in height, unless a greater
              restriction is imposed by the Development Review Board acting on an application. A fence of
              up to six feet in height may be constructed with no setback along the side, the rear, and in the
              front yard of a residential lot adjoining the rear of a corner lot as shown in the attached
              Figure.
       C.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.122(10)(a) and (b), the Development Review
              Board may require such fencing as shall be deemed necessary to promote and provide traffic
              safety, noise mitigation, and nuisance abatement, and the compatibility of different uses
              permitted on adjacent lots of the same zone and on adjacent lots of different zones.
       D.     Fences in residential zones shall not include barbed wire, razor wire, electrically charged wire,
              or be constructed of sheathing material such as plywood or flakeboard.
       E.     When fences create an enclosed side yard area five feet or less in width, gates or other
              openings shall be provided creating a through connection to either a rear yard or alley.

                                Figure 1 Fence Standards for Residential Development
(.08)  Corner Vision. Vision clearance shall be provided as specified in Section 4.177, or such additional
       requirements as specified by the City Engineer.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:79
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.09)  Prohibited Uses:
       A.     Uses of structures and land not specifically permitted in the applicable zoning districts.
       B.      The use of  a trailer, travel trailer or mobile coach as a residence, except as specifically
              permitted in an approved RV park.

       C.     Outdoor advertising displays, advertising signs, or advertising structures except as provided
              in Sections 4.156.05, 4.156.07, 4.156.09, and 4.156.10.

(.10)  Accessory Dwelling Units:
       A.     Accessory Dwelling Units, are permitted subject to standards and requirements of  this
              Subsection.
       B.      Standards:
              1.      Number Allowed.
                     a.      For detached single-family dwelling units and for townhouses: One per dwelling
                            unit.
                     b.      For all other dwelling units: None.
              2.      Maximum Floor Area: per definition in Section 4.001, 800 square feet of habitable
                     floor area. Per Subsection 4.138(.04)C.1., in the Old Town Overlay Zone the maximum
                     is 600 square feet of habitable floor area. Larger units shall be subject to standards
                     applied to duplex housing.
              3.      Accessory dwelling units shall be on the same lot as the dwelling unit to which they are
                     subordinate.
              4.      Accessory Dwelling Units may be either attached or detached, but are subject to
                     standards for the underlying zone except that ADUs are exempt from lot coverage
                     maximums.
              5.      Design Standards:
                     a.      Roof pitch shall be 4:12 to 12:12. No flat roofs allowed.
                            i.       Where the primary dwelling unit has a roof pitch of less than 4:12 the
                                    minimum roof pitch does not apply.
                     b.      Roof and siding materials shall match the respective material of one or more of
                            the following: (1) the primary dwelling unit on the same lot, (2) a primary dwelling
                            unit on an immediately adjacent lot, or (3) a primary dwelling unit within the
                            same subdivision.
                            i.       For the purpose of the requirement to match material, fiber cement siding
                                    made to appear like wood, stucco, or masonry may be used to match wood,
                                    stucco, or masonry respectively.
                     c.      Where design standards established for a zone or overlay zone are more restrictive
                            and/or extensive than a. and b. above the more restrictive and/or extensive design
                            standards shall apply. This includes design standards for the Village (V) Zone, the
                            Residential Neighborhood (RN) Zone, and the Old Town Overlay Zone.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:80
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.113

             6.      Authorization to develop Accessory Dwelling Units does not waive Building Code
                    requirements. Increased firewalls or building separation may be required as a means of
                    assuring adequate fire separation from one unit to the next. Applicants are encouraged
                    to contact, and work closely with, the Building Division of the City's Community
                    Development Department to assure that Building Code requirements are adequately
                    addressed.
             7.      Each accessory dwelling unit shall provide complete, independent permanent facilities
                    for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing and sanitation purposes, and shall have its
                    own separate secure entrance.
             8.      Accessory dwelling units may be short-term rentals, but the owner/local operator must
                    be in compliance with Chapter 7 of Wilsonville Code, which may include an active
                    business license with the City of  Wilsonville for a short-term rental business and
                    payment of all applicable lodging and other taxes.

(.11)  Reduced Setback Agreements. The following procedure has been created to allow the owners of
      contiguous residential properties to reduce the building setbacks that would typically be required
      between those properties, or to allow for neighbors to voluntary waive the solar access provisions
      of  Section 4.137. Setbacks can be reduced to zero through the procedures outlined in this
      subsection.

      A.     Examples:
             1.      First example: the owner of one house is allowed to build to the sideyard property line,
                    with no setback, provided that the owner of the neighboring property agrees and that
                    the agreements of both owners are recorded with the deed records for those properties.
             2.      Second example: the owner of one property is allowed to build a structure, or grow trees
                    that are not solar friendly, shading an adjoining property beyond the amount that is
                    permitted in Section 4.137.

      B.      Standards:

             1.      The use of the Reduced Setback Agreement procedure does not waive Building Code
                    requirements. The Building Code may require increased firewall standards or increased
                    setbacks on one property as a means of assuring adequate fire separation from the
                    adjoining property. Applicants are advised to work with the Building Division of the
                    Community Development Department prior to filing for approval of  a Reduced
                    Setback Agreement.

             2.      Property owners using the Reduced Setback Agreement procedure have responsibility
                    for notifying lien holders of  the changes, for meeting all requirements of  utility
                    providers, and for avoiding conflicts with established easements.
             3.      The Reduced Setback Agreement procedure shall require the approval of a Class I
                    Administrative Review permit.
             4.      Owners must provide accurate metes and bounds descriptions of all areas to be covered
                    by non-construction easements.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:81
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              5.      Nothing in this Section shall abrogate any easements or utility locations existing on the
                     subject properties. The property owners are responsible for assuring that easements and
                     utilities are not adversely affected by any construction that is anticipated.

(.12)  Bed and Breakfasts:

       A.     Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide standards for the establishment of bed
              and breakfast facilities. These regulations are intended to allow for a more efficient use of
              large, older houses in residential areas where the neighborhood character is preserved to
              maintain both the residential neighborhood experience and the bed and breakfast experi-
              ence. These regulations enable owners to maintain large residential structures in a manner
              that keeps them primarily in residential use. The proprietor can take advantage of the scale
              and often the architectural and historical significance of a residence. The regulations also
              provide an alternative form of lodging for visitors who prefer a residential setting.

       B.      Description:

              1.      Bed and Breakfast Home. An operation conducted by the owner-occupant of  a
                     dwelling in an RA-H, R, or PDR zone, or of  a one- or other district permitting
                     residential uses, that provides not more than five rooms for paying guests on an
                     overnight basis. Guest occupancy periods shall not exceed 14 consecutive days. The
                     occupancy of such a bed and breakfast home is limited to two persons or one family per
                     lodging unit or guest room.

              2.      Operations that would otherwise meet the standards listed above for Bed and Breakfast
                     Homes, but which exceed either the number of rooms available or the length of stay
                     allowed, shall be subject to the same standards as hotels or motels, listed elsewhere in
                     this Code.

       C.     Where These Regulations Apply. The regulations of Section 4.113(.12) apply to bed and
              breakfast facilities in PDR, R, and RA-H zones.

       D.     Conditional Use Review. Bed and breakfast facilities require a conditional use review, as
              specified in Section 4.184.

       E.     Use-Related Regulations:

              1.      Accessory Use. A bed and breakfast facility must be accessory to a household living use
                     on the site. This means that the individual or family who operate the facility must
                     occupy the house as their primary residence.

              2.      Maximum size. Bed and Breakfast facilities are limited to a maximum of five bedrooms
                     for guests and a maximum of six guests per night. In PDR-1, PDR-2, PDR-3, AND
                     PDR-4 zones, bed and breakfast facilities over these size limits are prohibited.

              3.      Services to guests:
                     a.      Food services may only be provided to overnight guests of a bed and breakfast
                            facility.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:82
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.113

                     b.      Serving alcohol to overnight guests is allowed. The proprietor may need Oregon
                            Liquor Control Commission approval to serve alcohol at a bed and breakfast
                            facility.
              4.      Meetings and Social Gatherings:
                     a.      Commercial meetings. Activities including luncheons, banquets, parties, wed-
                            dings, meetings, charitable fund raising, commercial or advertising activities, or
                            other gatherings for direct or indirect compensation, are prohibited at a bed and
                            breakfast facility.
                     b.      Private social gatherings. The residents of bed and breakfast facilities are allowed
                            to have only four private social gatherings, parties, or meetings per year, for more
                            than four guests. The private social gatherings must be hosted by and for the
                            enjoyment of the residents. The bed and breakfast operator must log the dates
                            these social gatherings are held. Private social gatherings for four or fewer guests
                            are allowed without limit as part of a normal household living use at the site. All
                            participants in the social gathering are counted as guests except for residents.

       F.      Site-Related Standards:
              1.      Development Standards. Bed and breakfast facilities must comply with the development
                     standards of the base zone, overlay zones, and plan districts, if applicable.
              2.      Appearance. Bed and breakfast homes or inns in residential zones must be compatible
                     with the surrounding residential neighborhood. No alterations to the exterior of the
                     house shall be for the purpose of establishing a more commercial building appearance
                     shall be permitted except for routine maintenance, alterations not requiring a building
                     permit, restoration or requirements related to safety or handicapped accessibility.
                     There shall be no exterior indication of a business except for the one permitted sign.
              3.      No cooking facilities are permitted in the individual guest rooms.
              4.      Food service shall only be provided to guests taking lodging in the bed and breakfast
                     home or inn.
              5.      In PDR-1, PDR-2, PDR-3 or PDR-4 zones, no bed and breakfast home may be located
                     on a lot closer than 500 feet from any other lot containing a bed and breakfast home,
                     with only one such establishment permitted per block face.
              6.      There shall be no more than one sign. Such sign shall not be self-illuminated and shall
                     not exceed six square feet in area. Additional sign requirements described in Sections
                     4.156.02 through 4.156.10 of this Code shall be met.
              7.      Each such use must obtain a Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Official before
                     it commences.
              8.      Bed and Breakfast facilities must comply with the off-street parking standards for
                     commercial development found in Section 4.155.
              9.      Bed and Breakfast facilities must comply with the landscaping standards for commer-
                     cial development found in Section 4.176.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:83
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.13)  The Planning Director and Development Review Board shall, in making their determination of
       compliance in attaching conditions, consider the effects of this action on the availability and cost
       of needed housing. The provisions of this section shall not be used in such a manner that additional
       conditions, either singularly or cumulatively, have the effect of unnecessarily increasing the cost of
       housing or effectively excluding a needed housing type. However, consideration of these factors
       shall not prevent the Board or Planning Director from imposing conditions of approval necessary
       to meet the minimum requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and Code.

(.14)  Design Standards for Detached Single-family and Middle Housing.

       A.     The standards in this subsection apply in all zones, except as indicated in 1.— 3. below:
              1.      The Façade Variety standards in Subsection C.1. do not apply in the Village Zone or the
                     area regulated by the Frog Pond West Master Plan zoned Residential Neighborhood, as
                     these zones/areas have their own variety standards, except that the variety standards do
                     apply to middle housing development with multiple detached units on a single lot for
                     which the variety standards of these zones/areas do not address.
              2.      The entry orientation for triplexes, quadplexes, and townhouses in Subsections D.1-2.
                     and E. 2-3. do not apply in the Village Zone or Residential Neighborhood Zone as these
                     zones have their own related standards applicable to all single-family and middle
                     housing.
              3.      The window standards for triplexes, quadplexes, and townhouses in Subsection D. 2.
                     And E. 3. do not apply in the Village Zone or the Frog Pond West neighborhood in the
                     Residential Neighborhood Zone as these zones/areas have their own related standards
                     applicable to all single-family and middle housing.

       B.      For the purpose of this subsection the term "residential structure" is inclusive of a series of
              structures that are attached to one another such as a grouping of townhouses.

       C.     Standards applicable to all residential structures except as noted in I. below.
              1.      Façade Variety:
                     a.      Each public-facing façade of a residential structure shall differ from the public-
                            facing façades of directly adjacent residential structures in at least one of the
                            three ways listed in Subsection d. below.
                     b.      Where public-facing façades repeat on the same block, at least two residential
                            structures with different public-facing façades shall intervene between residential
                            structures with the same public-facing façades, with sameness defined by not
                            differing in at least one of the three ways listed in Subsection d. below.
                     c.      For façades of residential structures facing a public street, the façade of any
                            residential structures directly across the street shall differ in at least one of the
                            three ways listed in Subsection d. below. Directly across means any residential
                            structure façade intersected by imaginary lines extending the shortest distance
                            across the street from the mid-point of a façade and from the edges of a façade.
                            See Figure 1 below.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:84
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.113

                     d.      A façade shall be considered different if it differs from another façade in at least
                             one of the following ways:

                             i.       Variation in type, placement, or width of architectural projections (such as
                                    porches, dormers, or gables) or other features that are used to meet the
                                    Articulation standards in Subsection (.14)C.2.b or Subsection (.14)E.4. If
                                    adjacent or opposite façades feature the same projection type, the projec-
                                    tions on adjacent/opposite façades must differ in at least one of the follow-
                                    ing ways:

                                    •        At least 20 percent difference in width; or

                                    •        Horizontally offset by at least five feet. For the purposes of  this
                                           standard, "offset" means a measurable difference of at least five feet
                                           from the left edge of the projection to the left edge of the front façade
                                           or at least five feet from the right edge of the projection to the right
                                           edge of the front façade.

                             ii.      At least 20 percent of the façade (excluding glazing) is covered by different
                                    exterior finish materials. The use of the same material in different types of
                                    siding (e.g., cedar shingles vs. cedar lap siding) shall be considered different
                                    materials for the purpose of this standard.

                             iii.     Variation in primary paint color as determined by a LRVR (Light Reflec-
                                    tance Value) difference of at least 15 percent.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:85
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                         Figure 1. Determining If A Residential Structure is Directly Across
                                                 the Street from Another

              2.      Architectural Consistency and Interest.
                      a.      Architectural styles shall not be mixed within the same residential structure (a
                             series of attached structures is one structure for the purpose of these standards).
                             Architectural style consistency is defined by adherence to all of the following:
                             i.       Use of the same primary and supporting façade materials throughout the
                                     structure.
                             ii.      Use of no more than two roof pitch angles.
                             iii.     Use of the same door size for each primary entrance in the structure.
                      b.      Articulation. All public-facing façades of residential structures, other than town-
                             houses, shall incorporate the following design elements at a minimum interval of
                             every 30 feet, except as noted in 2.c. below. The minimum number of design
                             elements is determined by dividing the façade length by 30 and rounding up to the
                             nearest whole number. For townhouse articulation standards, see subsection
                             (.14)E.4.
                             i.       varying rooflines.
                             ii.      offsets of at least 12 inches.
                             iii.     balconies.
                             iv.     projections of at least 12 inches and width of at least three feet.

Supp. No. 5                                                  CD4:86
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.113

                             v.      porches.
                             vi.     entrances that are recessed at least 24 inches or covered.
                             vii.    dormers at least three feet wide.
                     c.      For structures with two or more dwelling units, a single design element that spans
                             at least 50 percent of the façade of two adjacent units can count as two articula-
                             tion elements to meet the standard in subsection b. and can meet the standard for
                             60 feet of  façade width (two adjacent 30 foot intervals). Such elements may
                             overlap horizontally with other required design elements on the façade.
                     d.      Articulation Element Variety: Different articulation elements shall be used as
                             provided below. For the purpose of this standard, a "different element" is defined
                             as one of the following: a completely different element from the list in subsection
                             2.b above; the same type of element but at least 50 percent larger; or for varying
                             rooflines, vertically offset by at least three feet.
                             i.       Where two to four elements are required on a façade, at least two different
                                    elements shall be used.
                             ii.      Where more than four elements are required on a façade, at least three
                                    different elements shall be used.
                     e.      Reductions to required windows percentage: The required percent of façade of a
                             residential structure in the public-facing façade covered by windows or entry
                             doors for single-family or middle housing in any zone may be reduced to the
                             percentages that follows:
                             i.       For of 1.5 or 2-story façades facing the front or rear lot line:
                                    •        12.5 percent if six of the design features in Subsection e.v. below are
                                           used.
                                    •        Ten percent if seven or more of the design features in Subsection e.v.
                                           below are used.
                             ii.      For 1-story façades facing the front or rear lot line;
                                    •        12.5 percent if less than six design features in Subsection e.v. are used
                                    •        ten percent if six or more design features in Subsection e.v. are used
                             iii.     For façades facing a side lot line:
                                    •        Five percent regardless of the number of design features
                             iv.     Glass block does not count towards meeting window and entry percentage
                             v.      Window reduction design features:
                                    •        Dormers at least three feet wide.
                                    •        Covered porch entry—minimum 48 square foot covered front porch,
                                           minimum six feet deep and minimum of a six foot deep cover. A
                                           covered front stoop with minimum 24 square foot area, four foot
                                           depth and hand rails meets this standard.
                                    •        Front porch railing around at least two sides of the porch.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:87
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                   •        Second story balcony—projecting from the wall of the building a
                                           minimum of four feet and enclosed by a railing or parapet wall.
                                   •        Roof overhang of eight inches or greater.
                                   •        Columns, pillars or posts at least four inches wide and containing
                                           larger base materials.
                                   •        Decorative gables—cross or diagonal bracing, shingles, trim, corbels,
                                           exposed rafter ends or brackets (does not include a garage gable if
                                           garage projects beyond dwelling unit portion of street façade).
                                   •        Decorative molding above windows and doors.
                                   •        Decorative pilaster or chimneys.
                                   •        Bay or bow windows—extending a minimum of 12 inches outward
                                           from the main wall of a building and forming a bay or alcove in a
                                           room within the building.
                                   •        Sidelight and/or transom windows associated with the front door or
                                           windows in the front door.
                                   •        Window grids on all façade windows visible from behind fences
                                           (excluding any windows in the garage door or front door).
                                   •        Maximum nine foot wide garage doors or a garage door designed to
                                           resemble two smaller garage doors and/or windows in the garage door
                                           (only applicable to street facing garages).
                                   •        Decorative base materials such as natural stone, cultured stone or
                                           brick extending at least 36 inches above adjacent finished grade
                                           occupying a minimum of ten percent of the overall primary street
                                           facing façade. This design element does not count if behind a site-
                                           obscuring fence.
                                   •        Entry courtyards which are visible from, and connected directly to,
                                           the street. Courtyards shall have a minimum depth of ten feet and
                                           minimum width of 80 percent of the non-garage/driveway building
                                           width to be counted as a design element.
       D.     Standards applicable to Triplexes and Quadplexes except as noted in i. below.
              1.      Entry Orientation.
                     a.      At least one main entrance for each triplex or quadplex must meet the standards
                            in subsections b. and c. below.
                     b.      The entrance must be within eight feet of the longest street-facing exterior wall of
                            the dwelling unit or if no exterior wall faces a street the front of the dwelling unit
                            facing a common drive or open space as designated by the applicant; and
                     c.      The entrance must either:
                            i.       Face the street (see Figure 2. Main Entrance Facing the Street);
                            ii.      Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street (see Figure 3. Main
                                   Entrance at 45 degree angle from the street); or

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:88
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.113

                           iii.     Open onto a porch (see Figure 4. Main Entrance Opening onto a Porch).
                                  The porch must:

                                  •        Be at least 25 square feet in area; and

                                  •        Have at least one entrance facing the street or have a roof.

                                         Figure 2. Main Entrance Facing the
                                                         Street

                                         Figure 3. Main Entrance at 45° Angle
                                                   from the Street

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:88.1
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                           Figure 4. Main Entrance Opening onto
                                                          a Porch

              2.      Windows. A minimum of 15 percent of the area of all street-facing façades must include
                     windows or entrance doors. Façades separated from the street property line by a
                     dwelling are exempt from meeting this standard. See Figure 5. Window Coverage.

                                                 Figure 5. Window Coverage

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:88.2
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.113

             3.      Garages and Off-Street Parking Areas. The combined width of all garages (measured
                    from the interior of the garage door frame) and outdoor on-site parking and maneu-
                    vering areas shall not exceed a total of 50 percent of any street frontage (other than an
                    alley) (see Figure 6. Width of Garages and Parking Areas).

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:88.3

                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.113

                   Figure 6. Width of Garages and Parking Areas

4.     DrivewayApproach. Driveway approaches must comply with all of the following:

      a.      Thetotalwidthof alldrivewayapproachesmustnotexceed32feetperfrontage,
            as measured at the property line (see Figure 7. Driveway Approach Width and
            SeparationonLocalStreet).Forlotsorparcelswithmorethanonefrontage,see
            subsection c.

      b.      Driveway approaches may be separated when located on a local street.

                                        CD4:89
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    c.      In addition, lots or parcels with more than one frontage must comply with the
                           following:

                           i.       Lotsorparcelsmustaccessthestreetwiththelowesttransportationclassi-
                                  fication for vehicle traffic. For lots or parcels abutting an alley that is
                                  improved with a paved surface, access must be taken from the alley (see
                                  Figure 8. Alley Access).

                           ii.      Lotsorparcelswithfrontagesonlyoncollectorsand/orarterialstreetsmust
                                  meet the access standards in the Wilsonville Public Works Standards.

                           iii.     Lots or parcels with frontages only on local streets may have either:

                                  •        Twodrivewayapproachesnotexceeding32feetintotalwidthonone
                                         frontage; or

                                  •        One maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach per frontage (see
                                         Figure 9. Driveway Approach Options for Multiple Local Street
                                         Frontages).

                               Figure 7. Driveway Approach Width and Separation
                                                   on Local Street

                                                         CD4:90
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                   § 4.113

            Figure 8. Alley Access

                  CD4:91
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                   Figure 9. Driveway Approach Options for Multiple Local Street Frontages

       E.     Standards applicable to Townhouses.

              1.     Numberof AttachedDwellingUnits.

                     a.      Minimum. A townhouse project must contain at least two attached units.

                                                           CD4:92
                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.113

      b.      Maximum. The maximum number of townhouse units that may be attached
             together to form a group is specified below.
             •        R,OTR,PDR-1—PDR-3Zones:maximumfourattachedunitspergroup
             •        RN, V, PDR-4—PDR-7 Zones: maximum eight attached units per group,
                    except for initial development in Frog Pond West per Section 4.124.
2.     EntryOrientation. The main entrance of each townhouse unit must:
      a.      Be within eight feet of the longest wall of the dwelling unit facing a street or
             private drive; and
      b.      Either:
             i.       Face the street or private drive (see Figure 2. Main Entrance Facing the
                    Street);
             ii.      Beatanangleof upto45degreesfromthestreetorprivatedrive(seeFigure
                    3. Main Entrance at 45° Angle from the Street);
             iii.     Faceacommonopenspaceorprivateaccessordrivewaythatisabuttedby
                    dwellings on at least two sides; or
             iv.     Open onto a porch (see Figure 4. Main Entrance Opening onto a Porch).
                    The porch must:
                    A.     Be at least 25 square feet in area; and
                    B.      Haveatleastoneentrancefacingthestreetorprivatedriveorhavea
                          roof.
3.     Windows. A minimum of 15 percent of the area of all public-facing façades on each
      individualunitmustincludewindowsorentrancedoors.Half of thewindowareainthe
      door of an attached garage may count toward meeting this standard. See Figure 5.
      Window Coverage.
4.     Unitdefinition.Eachtownhouseunitmustincludeatleastoneof theitemslistedina.
      throughg.belowonatleastonepublic-facingfaçade(seeFigure10.TownhouseUnit
      Definition). Alternatively, if a single item from the list below spans across at least 50
      percent of two adjacent townhouse units, it can meet the standard for two units.
      a.      A roof dormer a minimum of four feet in width, or
      b.      Abalconyaminimumof twofeetindepthandfourfeetinwidthandaccessible
             from an interior room, or
      c.      A bay window that extends from the façade a minimum of two feet, or
      d.      An offset of the façade of a minimum of two feet in depth, either from the
             neighboring townhouse or within the façade of a single townhouse, or
      e.      An entryway that is recessed a minimum of three feet, or
      f.       A covered entryway with a minimum depth of four feet, or
      g.      A porch meeting the standards of subsection (.14)E.2.b.iv.
             Balconiesandbaywindowsmayencroachintoarequiredsetbackarea,pursuant
             to Section 4.180.

                                          CD4:93
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                        Figure 10. Townhouse Unit Definition
             5.     Driveway Access and Parking. Townhouses with frontage on a street or private drive
                    shall meet the following standards:
                    a.     Alley Access. Townhouse project sites abutting an alley that is improved with
                           pavement shall take access to the rear of townhouse units from the alley rather
                           than the public street.
                    b.     Front Access. Garages on the front façade of a townhouse, off-street parking
                           areasinthefrontyard,anddrivewaysinfrontof atownhouseareallowedif they
                           meet the following standards (see Figure 11. Townhouses with Parking in Front
                           Yard).
                           i.       Eachtownhouselothasastreetfrontageof atleast20feetonalocalstreet.

                                                         CD4:94
            PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.113

      ii.      A maximum of one driveway approach is allowed for every townhouse.
             Driveway approaches and/or driveways may be shared.

      iii.     Outdooron-siteparkingandmaneuveringareasdonotexceed12feetwide
             on any lot.

      iv.     The garage width does not exceed 12 feet, as measured from the inside of
             the garage door frame.

           Figure 11. Townhouses with Parking in Front Yard

c.     SharedAccess.Thefollowingstandardsapplytodrivewaysandparkingareasfor
      townhouse projects that do not meet all of the standards in subsections a. or b.

      i.       Off-street parking areas shall be accessed on the back façade or located in
             therearyard.Nooff-streetparkingshallbeallowedinthefrontyardorside
             yard of a townhouse.

      ii.      A townhouse project that includes a corner lot shall take access from a
             single driveway approach on the side of  the corner lot. See Figure 12.
             Townhouses on Corner Lot with Shared Access.

                                   CD4:95
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                            Figure 12. Townhouses on Corner Lot with Shared Access

                           iii.     Townhouseprojectsthatdonotincludeacornerlotshallconsolidateaccess
                                  for all lots into a single driveway. The driveway and approach are not
                                  allowed in the area directly between the front façade and front lot line of
                                  any of  the townhouses. See Figure 13. Townhouses with Consolidated
                                  Access.

                                                          CD4:96
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.113

                         Figure 13. Townhouses with Consolidated Access
                   iv.     Atownhouseprojectthatincludesconsolidatedaccessorshareddriveways
                          shall grant access easements to allow normal vehicular access and emer-
                          gency access.
F.      Standards applicable to Cottage Clusters.
      1.     CourtyardRequired.Allcottageswithinasinglecottageclustermustshareacommon
             courtyard.Acottageclusterprojectmayincludemorethanoneclusterandmorethan
             one common courtyard.
      2.     Numberof Dwellings.
             a.      Asinglecottageclustershallcontainaminimumof fourandamaximumof eight
                   cottages.
      3.     Setbacks.
             a.      Building Separation. Cottages shall be separated by a minimum distance of six
                   feet. The minimum distance between all other structures, including accessory
                   structures, shall be in accordance with building code requirements.
             b.      All other setbacks are provided in section (.02) or in the applicable base zone.

                                                CD4:97
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             4.     BuildingHeight. The maximum building height for all structures is 25 feet.

             5.     Footprint. The maximum building footprint for each cottage is 900 square feet. Indi-
                   vidualattachedgaragesupto200squarefeetshallbeexemptedfromthecalculationof
                   maximum building footprint.

             6.     MaximumHabitableFloorArea.Themaximumhabitablefloorareaof eachcottageis
                   1,400 square feet.

             7.     CottageOrientation.Cottagesmustbeclusteredaroundacommoncourtyardandmust
                   meetthefollowingstandards(seeFigure14.CottageClusterOrientationandCommon
                   Courtyard Standards:

                   a.      Eachcottagewithinaclustermusteitherabutthecommoncourtyardormustbe
                          directly connected to it by a pedestrian path.

                   b.      A minimum of 50 percent of cottages within a cluster must be oriented to the
                          common courtyard and must:
                          i.       Have a main entrance facing the common courtyard;
                          ii.      Be within ten feet from the common courtyard, measured from the façade
                                 of the cottage to the nearest edge of the common courtyard; and
                          iii.     Be connected to the common courtyard by a pedestrian path.

                   c.      Cottages within 20 feet of a street property line may have their entrances facing
                          the street.

                   d.      Cottages not facing the common courtyard or the street must have their main
                          entrances facing a pedestrian path that is directly connected to the common
                          courtyard.

             8.     Common Courtyard Design Standards. Each cottage cluster must share a common
                   courtyard in order to provide a sense of  openness and community of  residents.
                   Commoncourtyardsmustmeetthefollowingstandards(seeFigure14.CottageCluster
                   Orientation and Common Courtyard Standards):

                   a.      The common courtyard must be a single, contiguous piece.

                   b.      Cottagesmustabutthecommoncourtyardonatleasttwosidesof thecourtyard.

                   c.      Thecommoncourtyardmustcontainaminimumof 150squarefeetpercottage
                          within the associated cluster.

                   d.      The common courtyard must be a minimum of 15 feet wide at its narrowest
                          dimension.

                   e.      Thecommoncourtyardshallbedevelopedwithamixof landscaping,lawnarea,
                          pedestrianpaths,and/orpavedcourtyardarea,andmayalsoincluderecreational
                          amenities. Impervious elements of the common courtyard shall not exceed 75
                          percent of the total common courtyard area.

                                                       CD4:98
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.113

                   f.       Pedestrian paths must be included in a common courtyard. Paths that are
                          contiguous to a courtyard shall count toward the courtyard's minimum dimen-
                          sion and area. Parking areas, required setbacks, and driveways do not qualify as
                          part of a common courtyard.

                               Figure 14. Cottage Cluster Orientation and Common
                                             Courtyard Standards

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:99
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              9.      Community Buildings. Cottage cluster projects may include community buildings for
                     the shared use of residents that provide space for accessory uses such as community
                     meeting rooms, guest housing, exercise rooms, day care, or community eating areas.
                     Community buildings must meet the following standards:
                     a.      Each cottage cluster is permitted one community building.
                     b.      The community building shall have a maximum floor area of 1,400 sf.
                     c.      A community building that meets the definition of a dwelling unit must meet the
                             maximum 900 square foot footprint limitation that applies to cottages (pursuant
                             to subsection (.14)(F.5.), unless a covenant is recorded against the property
                             stating that the structure is not a legal dwelling unit and will not be used as a
                             primary dwelling.
              10.    Pedestrian Access.
                     a.      An accessible pedestrian path must be provided that connects the main entrance
                             of each cottage to the following:
                             i.       The common courtyard;
                             ii.      Shared parking areas;
                             iii.     Community buildings; and
                             iv.     Sidewalks in public rights-of-way abutting the site or rights-of-way if there
                                    are no sidewalks.
                     b.      The pedestrian path must be hard-surfaced and a minimum of four feet wide.
              11.    Windows. Cottages within 20 feet of a street property line must meet any window
                     coverage requirements of the applicable base zone.

              12.    Parking Design (see Figure 15. Cottage Cluster Parking Design Standards).
                     a.      Clustered parking. Off-street parking may be arranged in clusters, subject to the
                             following standards:
                             i.       A parking cluster must not exceed five contiguous spaces.
                             ii.      Parking clusters must be separated from other spaces by at least four feet of
                                    landscaping.
                             iii.     Clustered parking areas may be covered.
                             iv.     Parking areas must also meet the standards in Subsections 4.155(.02)—
                                    (.03), except where they conflict with these standards.
                     b.      Parking location and access.
                             i.       Off-street parking spaces and vehicle maneuvering areas shall not be lo-
                                    cated between a street property line and the front façade of cottages located
                                    closest to the street property line. This standard does not apply to alleys.
                             ii.      Off-street parking spaces shall not be located within ten feet of any property
                                    line, except alley property lines.
                             iii.     Driveways and drive aisles are permitted within ten feet of property lines.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:100
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.113

                     c.      Screening. Landscaping, fencing, or walls at least three feet tall shall separate
                            clustered parking areas and parking structures from common courtyards and
                            public streets.

                     d.      Garages and carports.

                            i.       Garages and carports (whether shared or individual) must not abut com-
                                   mon courtyards.

                            ii.      Individual attached garages up to 200 square feet shall be exempted from
                                   the calculation of maximum building footprint for cottages.

                            iii.     Individual detached garages must not exceed 400 square feet in floor area.

                            iv.     Garage doors for attached and detached individual garages must not exceed
                                   20 feet in width as measured from the interior of the garage door frame.

              13.    Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings must not exceed 400 square feet in floor area.

              14.    Existing Structures. On a lot or parcel to be used for a cottage cluster project, an
                     existing detached single-family detached dwelling on the same lot at the time of
                     proposed development of the cottage cluster may remain within the cottage cluster
                     project area under the following conditions:

                     a.      The existing dwelling may be nonconforming with respect to the requirements of
                            this subsection (.14)F.

                     b.      The existing dwelling may be expanded up to a maximum height of 25 feet or a
                            maximum building footprint of 900 square feet; however, existing dwellings that
                            exceed these maximum height and/or footprint standards may not be expanded.

                     c.      The existing dwelling shall be excluded from the calculation of orientation toward
                            the common courtyard, per subsection (.14)F.7.b.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:101
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                 Figure 15. Cottage Cluster Parking Design Standards

Supp. No. 5                                                   CD4:102
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.113

       G.     Standards applicable to Cluster Housing besides Cottage Clusters.
              1.      Architectural Consistency. Architecture shall be consistent within the same two-unit,
                     three-unit, or four-unit cluster. However, facade variety standards in Subsection (.14)C.1.
                     shall continue to apply. Architectural consistency is defined by adherence to all of the
                     following:
                     a.      Use of the same primary and supporting façade materials throughout the cluster.
                     b.      Use of no more than two roof pitch angles.
                     c.      Use of the same door size for each primary entrance in the structures.
              2.      Entry Orientation.
                     a.      The entry orientation standards apply as follows:
                            i.       At least one main entrance for each cluster home must meet the standards
                                    in subsections b and c below.
                     b.      The entrance must be within eight feet of the longest street-facing exterior wall of
                            the dwelling unit or if no exterior wall faces a street the front of the dwelling unit,
                            facing a common drive or open space as designated by the applicant; and
                     c.      The entrance must either:
                            i.       Face the street (see Figure 2. Main Entrance Facing the Street);
                            ii.      Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street (see Figure 3. Main
                                    Entrance at 45° Angle from the Street); or
                            iii.     Open onto a porch (see Figure 4. Main Entrance Opening onto a Porch).
                                    The porch must:
                                    •        Be at least 25 square feet in area; and
                                    •        Have at least one entrance facing the street or have a roof.
              3.      Windows. A minimum of 15 percent of the area of all street-facing facades must include
                     windows or entrance doors. Facades separated from the street property line by a
                     dwelling are exempt from meeting this standard. See Figure 5. Window Coverage.

              4.      Garages and Off-Street Parking Areas. The combined width of all garages (measured
                     from the interior of the garage door frame) and outdoor on-site parking and maneu-
                     vering areas shall not exceed a total of 50 percent of any street frontage (other than an
                     alley). Garages and off-street parking areas that are separated from the street property
                     line by a dwelling are not subject to this standard. (See Figure 6. Width of Garages and
                     Parking Areas).

              5.      Driveway Approach. Driveway approaches must comply with all of the following:
                     a.      The total width of all driveway approaches must not exceed 32 feet per frontage,
                            as measured at the property line (see Figure 7. Driveway Approach Width and
                            Separation on Local Street). For lots or parcels with more than one frontage, see
                            subsection c.
                     b.      Driveway approaches may be separated when located on a local street.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:103
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     c.      In addition, lots or parcels with more than one frontage must comply with the
                             following:
                             i.       Lots or parcels must access the street with the lowest transportation classi-
                                    fication for vehicle traffic. For lots or parcels abutting an alley that is
                                    improved with pavement access must be taken from the alley (see Figure 8.
                                    Alley Access).
                             ii.      Lots or parcels with frontages only on collectors and/or arterial streets must
                                    meet the access standards in the Wilsonville Public Works Standards.
                             iii.     Lots or parcels with frontages only on local streets may have either:
                                    •        Two driveway approaches not exceeding 32 feet in total width on one
                                           frontage; or
                                    •        One maximum 16-foot-wide driveway approach per frontage (see
                                           Figure 9. Driveway Approach Options for Multiple Local Street
                                           Frontages).

              6.      Setbacks.
                     a.      Building Separation. Cluster housing structures shall be separated by a minimum
                             distance of six feet. The minimum distance between all other structures, including
                             accessory structures, shall be in accordance with building code requirements.
                     b.      All other setbacks are provided in the applicable base zone.

              7.      Pedestrian Access.
                     a.      An accessible pedestrian path must be provided that connects the main entrance
                             of each unit to the following:
                             i.       Shared open space;
                             ii.      Shared parking areas; and
                             iv.     Sidewalks in public rights-of-way abutting the site or rights-of-way if there
                                    are no sidewalks.
                     b.      The pedestrian path must be hard-surfaced and a minimum of four feet wide.

       H.     Combining Unit Types in One Development.

              1.      If a project proposes a mix of middle housing types which creates a conflict with
                     various standards, the more restrictive standards shall apply.

       I.      Existing Structures and Conversions:

              1.      Where a residential structure is converted from one type of dwelling unit to another
                     without any additions, the design standards in C.—H. do not apply.

              2.      Where a residential structure is added on to, the design standards in C.—H. only apply
                     if the footprint is expanded by 25 percent or more.

       J.       Alternative Discretionary Review: As an alternative to meeting one or more design standards
              of this subsection an applicant may request a waiver as part of Site Design Review by the

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:104
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.113

              Development Review Board of  a proposed design. In addition to the waiver criteria in
              Sections 4.118 and 4.140 and applicable Site Design Review Standards, affirmative findings
              shall be made that the following standards are met:
       1.      The request is compatible with existing surrounding development in terms of placement of
              buildings, scale of buildings, and architectural design;

       2.      The request is due to special conditions or circumstances that make it difficult to comply with
              the applicable Design Standards, or the request would achieve a design that is superior to the
              design that could be achieved by complying with the applicable Design Standards;
       3.      The request continues to comply with and be consistent with State statute and rules related to
              Middle Housing, including being consistent with State definitions of  different Middle
              Housing types; and

       4.      The request remains substantially consistent with any legislative master plan the property is
              included within.

(.15)  Design Standards for Multi-Family Housing:

       A.     Purpose and Intent. The purpose of  the multi-family design standards is to create and
              maintain street frontages that are varied and attractive, create an environment that is
              conducive to walking, and provide natural surveillance of public spaces. The standards will
              also promote building details in multi-family development that provide visual interest,
              contribute to a high-quality living environment for residents, give a sense of quality and
              permanence, and enhance compatibility with the surrounding community. The design stan-
              dards also aim to create consistency with design standards for other residential unit types that
              multi-family housing may be built adjacent to.
       B.      Applicability. These standards apply to all multi-family development except for the following:
              1.      Mixed-use buildings that include ground floor non-residential uses or live-work units
                     and multi-family residential above.
              2.      Multi-family buildings in the Village and Town Center Zones which are subject to
                     zone-specific standards in Section 4.125 or 4.132, respectively.

       C.     Entrance Orientation.
              1.      At least one main entrance for each multi-family structure must either meet the
                     standards in subsections a. and b. below, or must meet the alternative standard in
                     subsection C.2.
                     a.      The entrance must be within eight feet of the longest street-facing exterior wall of
                            the structure; and
                     b.      The entrance must either:
                            i.       Face the street;
                            ii.      Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street; or
                            iii.     Open onto a porch. The porch must:
                                   a.      Be at least 25 square feet in area; and

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:105
§ 4.113                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                    b.      Have at least one entrance facing the street or have a roof.
              2.      Alternative standard. As an alternative to subsection 1., a main entrance to a multi-
                      family structure may face a courtyard if the courtyard-facing entrance is located within
                      60 feet of a street and the courtyard meets the following standards:
                      a.      The courtyard must be at least 15 feet in width;
                      b.      The courtyard must abut a street; and
                      c.      The courtyard must be landscaped or hard-surfaced for use by pedestrians.
       D.     Windows. A minimum of 15 percent of the area of all public-facing façades must consist of
              windows or entrance doors, including associated frames and trim. Façades separated from
              the street or public space by a dwelling are exempt from meeting this standard. Required
              windows shall be clear glass and not mirrored or frosted, except for bathrooms.
       E.     Articulation.
              1.      Minimum Articulation. All public-facing façades shall incorporate a selection of the
                      following design elements at a minimum interval of  every 30 feet. The minimum
                      number of design elements from this list that will be required is determined by dividing
                      the façade length (in feet) by 30 and rounding up to the nearest whole number.
                      a.      Varying rooflines.
                      b.      Offsets of at least 12 inches.
                      c.      Balconies.
                      d.      Projections of at least 12 inches and width of at least three feet.
                      e.      Porches.
                      f.       Entrances that are recessed at least 24 inches or covered.
                      g.      Dormers at least three feet wide.
              2.      Articulation Element Variety. Different articulation design elements shall be used as
                      provided below, based on the length of the facade. For the purpose of this standard, a
                      "different element" is defined as one of the following: a completely different element
                      from the list in subsection E.1. above; the same element but at least 50 percent larger; or
                      varying rooflines that are vertically offset by at least three feet.
                      a.      Where two to four elements are required on a façade by E.1., at least two different
                             elements shall be used.
                      b.      Where more than four elements are required on a façade by E.1., at least three
                             different elements shall be used.
       F.      Pedestrian Access and Circulation. The following standards are intended to ensure safe and
              efficient circulation for pedestrians within multi-family development.
              1.      Each multi-family development shall contain an internal pedestrian circulation system
                      that makes connections between individual units and parking areas, green focal points
                      and other common open space areas, children's play areas, and public rights-of-way. All
                      pedestrian connections (walkways) shall meet the following standards:
                      a.      Except as required for crosswalks, per subsection 3., where a walkway abuts a
                             vehicle circulation area, it shall be physically separated by a curb that is raised at
                             least six inches or by bollards.

Supp. No. 5                                                 CD4:106
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.115

                     b.      Walkways shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, brick or masonry pavers, or
                            other hard surface, and not less than five feet wide.
              2.      All walkways shall comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
                     Act.
              3.      In order to provide safe crossings of driveways and parking areas, crossings shall be
                     clearly marked with either contrasting paving materials (such as pavers, light-color
                     concrete inlay between asphalt, or similar contrasting material) or reflective striping
                     that emphasizes the crossing under low light and inclement weather conditions.
              4.      Pedestrian connections shall be provided between buildings within the development,
                     and between the development and adjacent rights-of-way, transit stops, parks, schools,
                     and commercial developments. At least one connection shall be made to each adjacent
                     street and sidewalk for every 200 linear feet of street frontage. Sites with less than 200
                     linear feet of street frontage shall provide at least one connection to the street and/or
                     sidewalk.
       G.     Off-Street Parking Location and Design. The following standards are intended to support a
              pedestrian-friendly street environment and to minimize the visual impacts of parking areas
              and garages.
              1.      Off-street parking spaces and drive aisles shall not be located in the Front Yard.
              2.      Off-street parking areas shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the total length of
                     each street frontage as measured 20 feet from the street property line. Drive aisles are
                     only counted as parking areas if:
              a.      parking spaces adjacent to the drive aisle are provided; and
              b.      the drive aisle is between a building and street.
              3.      Off-street parking spaces shall not be located within ten feet of any property line, except
                     alley property lines. Driveways and drive aisles necessary to connect to the street are
                     permitted within ten feet of property lines.
              4.      Landscaping, fencing, or walls at least three feet tall shall separate parking areas from
                     useable open space, green focal points, and public streets (except alleys).
              5.      If garages are attached to a street-facing facade, they may not be located closer to the
                     street property line than the building facade.
              6.      Driveways associated with attached garages that take direct individual access from a
                     public or private street must meet the townhouse driveway and access standards in
                     Subsection 4.113(.14)E.5. For the purpose of those standards, each individual multi-
                     family garage shall meet the standards applicable to a townhouse or townhouse lot.
(Ord. No. 677, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017; Ord.
No. 825, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 841, eff. 6-4-2020; Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Section  4.115.  Standards Applying to Manufactured Housing in all Zones Where Manufactured Housing
                   is Permitted.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002)

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:107
§ 4.116                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.116.  Standards Applying to Commercial Developments in any Zone.

Any commercial use shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Code and to the following, unless
otherwise provided for by a specific zone, overlay zone or a legislative master plan:

       (.01)  Commercial developments shall be planned in the form of centers or complexes as provided
              in the City's Comprehensive Plan. As noted in the Comprehensive Plan, Wilsonville's focus
              on centers or complexes is intended to limit strip commercial development.(.02) Where the
              land use map of Wilsonville's Comprehensive Plan calls for "Office Commercial" develop-
              ment, not less than 60 percent of the total square footage of the ground floors of buildings
              within the development shall be in office use. Total floor area dedicated to retail use shall not
              exceed 30 percent. On-site parking may be limited in order to control traffic generation.

       (.03)  Where the land use map of  Wilsonville's Comprehensive Plan calls for "Commercial/
              Industrial mixed use" development, not more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the
              development shall consist of retail space.

       (.04)  Where  the  land  use  map  of  Wilsonville's  Comprehensive  Plan  calls  for  "Residential/
              Commercial mixed use" development, not less than 50 percent of the total floor area of the
              development shall consist of residential units.

       (.05)  All businesses, service or processing, shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
              building; except for:
              A.     The sale of automotive fuel, lubricants, and fluids at service stations.
              B.      Car washes and car vacuum bays.
              C.     Off-street parking for customers and employees and off-street loading.
              D.     Outdoor seating areas associated with food and drink establishments on private
                     property, or on public easements, provided the area and activities conform to ADA
                     standards and do not interfere with public uses, safety, access or circulation.
              E.     Temporary staging of inventory, as shall be authorized through a site development
                     permit, complying with the following additional minimum development and perfor-
                     mance standards:
                     1.      The staging area shall be screened by a fully sight obscuring fence or planting,
                            high wall, high berm or high screen landscape standard as specified in Section
                            4.176—Landscaping Screening and Buffering;
                     2.      All parts of the staged inventory shall be completely concealed on all sides from
                            public view at the right-of-way line; and
                     3.      The staged inventory shall be relocated into a completely enclosed structure of
                            the primary retail operation within 48 hours of placement.
              F.      Exterior sales that are specifically authorized through temporary use permit approval,
                     subject to conditions of approval. Exterior sales that may be permitted are those that
                     are limited in time duration, such as sidewalk sales, grand openings, or farmers'
                     markets.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:108
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.116

              G.     Exterior sales areas, complying with the following minimum development and perfor-
                     mance standards:
                     1.      The sales area shall be accessory to, and shall not exceed five percent of the floor
                            area of the primary retail operation.
                     2.      The sales area shall be completely covered by a permanent structure of a design,
                            construction and architecture compatible with that of  the structure of  the
                            primary retail operation.
                     3.      All required ADA and pedestrian access ways and circulation aisles shall remain
                            clear at all times.
                     4.      For new development, the Development Review Board may grant a waiver to
                            allow exterior sales area of up to ten percent of the floor area of the primary retail
                            operation, provided that findings can be made that:
                            a.      The expanded covered area has received approval through a Stage II/Site
                                    Design Review process.
                            b.      The expanded area does not detract from the overall character of  the
                                    development or the surrounding neighborhood.
                            c.      Partial walls are required for screening large or bulky items.
                     5.      For Development existing on December 21, 2005, the Planning Director, pursu-
                            ant to a Class II Administrative Review Process, may grant a waiver to allow
                            exterior sales areas of up to ten percent of the floor area of the primary retail
                            operation, provided that findings can be made that:
                            a.      The expanded area does not detract from the overall character of the area,
                            b.      Partial walls are required for screening large or bulky items.

       (.06)  In any Commercial Development directly across the street from any Residential District, the
              loading facilities shall be at least 20 feet from the street, shall be sited whenever practicable at
              the rear or side, and if facing a residential area, shall be properly screened. Screening shall be
              provided in a manner that is compatible with the adjacent residential development in terms of
              quality of materials and design. Such screening shall effectively minimize light glare and
              noise levels to those of adjacent residential areas.

       (.07)  Uses shall be limited to those which will meet the performance standards specified in Section
              4.135(.05), with the exception of 4.135(.05)(M.)(3.).

       (.08)  Corner lots shall conform to the vision clearance standards set forth in Section 4.177.

       (.09)  Trailer, trailer houses, mobile coaches, or any altered variation thereof shall not be used for
              the purpose of conducting a trade or calling or for storage of material unless approved for
              such purpose as a temporary use.

       (.10)  Commercial developments generally:

              A.     [Right-of-way line.] No structure shall be erected closer than the right-of-way line then
                     existing or the officially planned right-of-way of any public, county, or state road.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:109
§ 4.116                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              B.      Minimum Front Yard Setback. None required except when front yard abuts a more
                     restrictive district. When front yard abuts a more restrictive district, setbacks shall be
                     the same as the abutting district.

              C.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. None required except when rear yard abuts a more
                     restrictive district. When rear yard abuts a more restrictive district, setbacks shall be the
                     same as for the abutting district.

              D.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. None required except when side yard abuts a more
                     restrictive district. When side yard abuts a more restrictive district, setbacks shall be one
                     and one-half times the setback required for the abutting district.

              E.     Maximum Building Height. 35 feet, unless taller buildings are specifically allowed in the
                     zone.

              F.      Minimum Lot Size. No limitation, save and except as may otherwise be affected by
                     other provisions of this Code.

              G.     Maximum Lot Coverage. No limitation, save and except as may otherwise be affected by
                     other provisions of this Code.

              H.     Minimum Street Frontage. No limitation, save and except as may be necessary to
                     provide minimum access requirements.

       (.11)  Hotels or Motels:

              A.     Minimum Lot Size. 1,000 square feet for each unit.

              B.      Minimum Street Frontage. 100 feet.

              C.     Front Yard Setback. 30 feet, unless located in the Old Town overlay zone, in which case
                     the standards of the overlay zone shall apply. Structures on corner lots shall observe the
                     minimum setback on both streets or tracts with a private drive.

              D.     Minimum Rear Yard Setback. 30 feet.

              E.     Minimum Side Yard Setback. 24 feet.

       (.12)  Off-Street Parking is to be as specified in Section 4.155.

       (.13)  Signs are subject to the standards of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

       (.14)  Prohibited Uses:

              A.     The use of a trailer, trailer house, or mobile coach as a residence is prohibited except
                     where approved within an RV park or approved as a temporary use during construc-
                     tion.

              B.      Any use that violates the performance standards of Section 4.135(.05), other than
                     4.135(.05)(M.)(3.) is prohibited within commercial developments.
(Ord. No. 580, 4-4-2005; Ord. No. 601, 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012;
Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:110
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.118

Section  4.117.  Standards Applying to Industrial Developments in any Zone.

(.01)  All industrial developments, uses, or activities are subject to performance standards. If  not
       otherwise specified in the Planning and Development Code, industrial developments, uses, and
       activities shall be subject to the performance standards specified in Section 4. 135 (.05) (PDI Zone).

Section  4.118.  Standards Applying to all Planned Development Zones.

(.01)  Height Guidelines. In "S" overlay zones, the solar access provisions of Section 4.137 shall be used
       to determine maximum building heights. In cases that are subject to review by the Development
       Review Board, the Board may further regulate heights as follows:
       A.     Restrict or regulate the height or building design consistent with adequate provision of fire
              protection and fire-fighting apparatus height limitations.

       B.      To provide buffering of low density developments by requiring the placement of three or
              more story buildings away from the property lines abutting a low density zone.
       C.     To regulate building height or design to protect scenic vistas of Mt. Hood or the Willamette
              River.
       D.     In no case shall the height of duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, or townhouses be limited to less
              than the maximum height allowed for detached single-family dwellings in the same zone. In
              addition, in no case shall the height of triplexes, fourplexes, or townhouses be limited to less
              than 25 feet.

(.02)  Underground Utilities shall be governed by Sections 4.300 to 4.320. All utilities above ground shall
       be located so as to minimize adverse impacts on the site and neighboring properties.

(.03)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.140 to the contrary, the Development Review Board,
       in order to implement the purposes and objectives of Section 4.140, and based on findings of fact
       supported by the record may:
       A.     Waive the following typical development standards:
              1.      Minimum lot area;
              2.      Lot width and frontage;
              3.      Height and yard requirements;
              4.      Lot coverage;
              5.      Lot depth;
              6.      Street widths;
              7.      Sidewalk requirements;
              8.      Height of buildings other than signs;
              9.      Parking space configuration and drive aisle design;
              10.    Minimum number of loading spaces;
              11.    Shade tree islands in parking lots, provided that alternative shading is provided;

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:111
§ 4.118                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              12.    Fence height;
              13.    Architectural design standards, including residential design standards;
              14.    Transit facilities;

              15.    On-site pedestrian access and circulation standards;
              16.    Solar access standards, as provided in section 4.137;
              17.    Open space in the Frog Pond West Neighborhood in the Residential Neighborhood
                     zone; and;
              18.    Lot orientation.

       B.      The following shall not be waived by the Board, unless there is substantial evidence in the
              whole record to support a finding that the intent and purpose of the standards will be met in
              alternative ways:

              1.      Open space requirements in residential areas, except that the Board may waive or
                     reduce open space requirements in the Frog Pond West Neighborhood in the Residen-
                     tial Neighborhood zone. Waivers in compliance with [Section] 4.127(.09)(B)(2)(d);

              2.      Minimum density standards and housing variety standards in residential zones. The
                     required minimum density may be reduced by the Board in the Residential Neighbor-
                     hood zone in compliance with [Section] 4.127(.06) B; and
              3.      Minimum landscape, buffering, and screening standards.

       C.     The following shall not be waived by the Board, unless there is substantial evidence in the
              whole record to support a finding that the intent and purpose of the standards will be met in
              alternative ways, and the action taken will not violate any applicable federal, state, or regional
              standards:
              1.      Maximum number of parking spaces;

              2.      Standards for mitigation of trees that are removed;
              3.      Standards for mitigation of wetlands that are filled or damaged; and

              4.      Trails or pathways shown in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.

       D.     Locate individual building, accessory buildings, off-street parking and loading facilities,
              open space and landscaping and screening without reference to lot lines; and

       E.     Adopt other requirements or restrictions, inclusive of, but not limited to, the following,
              except that no additional requirements or restrictions can conflict with established clear and
              objective standards for residential development or be grounds for denying a residential
              development proposal when the applicant has selected the clear and objective path for
              approval:

              1.      Percent coverage of  land by buildings and structures in relationship to property
                     boundaries to provide stepped increases in densities away from low-density develop-
                     ment.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:112
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.118

              2.      Parking ratios and areas expressed in relation to use of various portions of the property
                     and/or building floor area.

              3.      The locations, width and improvement of vehicular and pedestrian access to various
                     portions of the property, including portions within abutting street or private drive.

              4.      Arrangement and spacing of buildings and structures to provide appropriate open
                     spaces around buildings.

              5.      Location and size of off-street loading areas and docks.

              6.      Uses of buildings and structures by general classification, and by specific designation
                     when there are unusual requirements for parking, or when the use involves noise, dust,
                     odor, fumes, smoke, vibration, glare or radiation incompatible with present or potential
                     development of surrounding property. Such incompatible uses may be excluded in the
                     amendment approving the zone change or the approval of requested permits.

              7.      Measures designed to minimize or eliminate noise, dust, odor, fumes, smoke, vibration,
                     glare, or radiation which would have an adverse effect on the present or potential
                     development on surrounding properties.

              8.      Schedule of time for construction of the proposed buildings and structures and any
                     stage of development thereof to insure consistency with the City's adopted Capital
                     Improvements Plan and other applicable regulations.

              9.      A waiver of the right of remonstrance by the applicant to the formation of a Local
                     Improvement District (LID) for streets, utilities and/or other public purposes.

              10.    Modify the proposed development in order to prevent congestion of streets and/or to
                     facilitate transportation.

              11.    Condition the issuance of an occupancy permit upon the installation of landscaping or
                     upon a reasonable scheduling for completion of the installation of landscaping. In the
                     latter event, a posting of a bond or other security in an amount equal to 110 percent of
                     the cost of the landscaping and installation may be required.

              12.    A dedication of property for streets, pathways, and bicycle paths in accordance with
                     adopted Facilities Master Plans or such other streets necessary to provide proper
                     development of adjacent properties.

(.04)  The Planning Director and Development Review Board shall, in making their determination of
       compliance in attaching conditions, consider the effects of this action on availability and cost. The
       provisions of this section shall not be used in such a manner that additional conditions, either
       singularly or cumulatively, have the effect of unnecessarily increasing the cost of development.
       However, consideration of these factors shall not prevent the Board from imposing conditions of
       approval necessary to meet the minimum requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and Code.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:113
§ 4.118                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.05)  The Planning Director, Development Review Board, or on appeal, the City Council, may as a
       condition of approval for any development for which an application is submitted, require that
       portions of the tract or tracts under consideration be set aside, improved, conveyed or dedicated for
       the following uses:

       A.     Recreational Facilities: The Director, Board, or Council, as the case may be, may require that
              suitable area for parks or playgrounds be set aside, improved or permanently reserved for the
              owners, residents, employees or patrons of the development consistent with adopted Park
              standards and Parks and Recreation Master Plan.

       B.      Open Space Area: Whenever private and/or common open space area is provided, the City
              shall require that an association of owners or tenants be established which shall adopt such
              Articles of Incorporation, By-Laws or other appropriate agreement, and shall adopt and
              impose such Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions on such open space areas and/or
              common areas that are acceptable to the Development Review Board. Said association shall
              be formed and continued for the purpose of maintaining such open space area. Such an
              association, if required, may undertake other functions. It shall be created in such a manner
              that owners of property shall automatically be members and shall be subject to assessments
              levied to maintain said open space area for the purposes intended. The period of existence of
              such association shall be not less than 20 years and it shall continue thereafter and until a
              majority vote of the members shall terminate it, and the City Council formally votes to
              accept such termination.

       C.     Easements: Easements necessary to the orderly extension of public utilities, and the protec-
              tion of  open space, may be required as a condition of  approval. When required, such
              easements must meet the requirements of the City Attorney prior to recordation.

(.06)  Nothing in this Code shall prevent the owner of a site that is less than two acres in size from filing
       an application to rezone and develop the site as a Planned Development. Smaller properties may or
       may not be suitable for such development, depending upon their particular sizes, shapes, locations,
       and the nature of the proposed development, but Planned Developments shall be encouraged at
       any appropriate location.

(.07)  Density Transfers. In order to protect significant open space or resource areas, the Development
       Review Board may authorize the transfer of development densities from one portion of a proposed
       development to another. Such transfers may go to adjoining properties, provided that those
       properties are considered to be part of the total development under consideration as a unit.

(.08)  Wetland Mitigation and other mitigation for lost or damaged resources. The Development Review
       Board may, after considering the testimony of experts in the field, allow for the replacement of
       resource areas with newly created or enhanced resource areas. The Board may specify the ratio of
       lost to created and/or enhanced areas after making findings based on information in the record. As
       much as possible, mitigation areas shall replicate the beneficial values of the lost or damaged
       resource areas.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:114
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.120

(.09)  Habitat-Friendly Development Practices. To the extent practicable, development and construction
       activities of any lot shall consider the use of habitat-friendly development practices, which include:

       A.     Minimizing grading, removal of native vegetation, disturbance and removal of native soils,
              and impervious area;

       B.      Minimizing adverse hydrological impacts on water resources, such as using the practices
              described in Part (a) of Table NR-2 in Section 4.139.03, unless their use is prohibited by an
              applicable and required state or federal permit, such as a permit required under the federal
              Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., or the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C.
              §§ 300f et seq., and including conditions or plans required by such permit;

       C.     Minimizing impacts on wildlife corridors and fish passage, such as by using the practices
              described in Part (b) of Table NR-2 in Section 4.139.03; and

       D.     Using the practices described in Part (c) of Table NR-2 in Section 4.139.03.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017;
Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.120.  Zones. FDA-H Future Development Agricultural—Holding Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this zone to serve as a holding zone to preserve the future urban level
       development potential as undeveloped or underdeveloped property designated for more intensive
       development. This zone has been applied to all urbanizable properties within the City which are
       planned for development and which have not previously received development approval in accor-
       dance with the Comprehensive Plan.

(.02)  Where zone can be applied. No land zoned one of the other zoning designations in Wilsonville's
       Development Code can be rezoned to FDA-H.

(.03)  Uses Permitted Outright:

       A.     One single-family dwelling, per lot and accessory dwelling units subject to the standards of
              Section 4.113(.10). Where the Comprehensive Plan calls for future non-residential zoning of
              the site, the building permit for any proposed residential development shall not be granted
              until a statement has been recorded applying to the title of the subject property, notifying any
              potential buyer that future development in the area is expected to be non-residential.

       B.      Except for existing lots of record of less than two acres, recorded prior to the effective date of
              this Code, partitioning or subdivision of properties designated for development shall only be
              considered in conjunction with or following a zone change in conformance with the Com-
              prehensive Plan. Said zoning shall confirm the adequate provision of public facilities and the
              protection of future urban development potentials.

       C.     If the proposed development is for a less intensive interim density consisting of large lots, a
              pre-plat and Site Plan review shall be required that provides for future development of the
              property in accordance with the uses and densities shown in the Comprehensive Plan. Said

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:115
§ 4.120                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              plat shall be filed on the City's Lien Docket as an obligation toward the property, together
              with an agreement of non-remonstrance towards the formation of any local improvement
              district which may serve the subject site.

       D.     For properties designated in the City's Comprehensive Plan for nonresidential use, the
              intensity of  use shall be restricted to activities which do not require construction of  a
              permanent structure and which will not tend to restrict, obstruct, or adversely affect the
              future development of the property for its designated use. Except, however, that the devel-
              opment of a single-family dwelling shall be permitted as specified in subsection (.03)A.,
              above.

       E.     Temporary structures or uses, subject to the procedures for temporary uses set forth in
              Section 4.163.

       F.      Agriculture, horticulture, greenhouses, nurseries (provided that any commercial sales of
              products shall require the approval of a conditional use permit), timber growing, grazing,
              and the small scale raising of livestock and animals.

       G.     Public parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and grounds, public golf
              courses, tennis courts, and similar recreational uses, all of a non-commercial nature. Any
              principal building or public swimming pool shall be located not less than 45 feet from any
              other lot in a residential or RA-H district.

       H.     Accessory Uses Permitted:
              1.      Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of the aforesaid
                     principal uses permitted located on the same lot therewith.
              2.      Home occupations.
              3.      Signs, subject to the provisions of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

(.04)  Uses Permitted Subject to receiving approval of a Conditional Use Permit:

       A.     Private parks, municipal and government buildings, public utilities, public information
              centers, semi-public buildings of a non-commercial nature, churches, public, private, and
              parochial schools as provided in Section 4.184 when approved by the Development Review
              Board at a Public Hearing as provided in Section 4.013.

       B.      Roadside stands when located on the same property as the principal uses, selling only those
              products that are produced on the same property on which the stand is located, or on
              adjacent property.

(.05)  Dimensional Standards:
       A.     Minimum Lot Size: 30,000 square feet.

       B.      Minimum Front and Rear Yard Setbacks: 30 feet.
              Minimum Side Yard Setback: Ten feet.
              1.      Minimum setback for residential garage or carport: At least five feet behind the front of
                     the nearest residential unit on the property. In no case shall the front of a garage or

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:116
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.120

                     carport be located less than twenty (20) feet behind a sidewalk or a public right-of-way
                     providing access to that garage or carport. Except, however, in the case of an alley
                     where garages or carports are located within five feet of the property line adjoining the
                     alley.

       C.     Minimum Street Frontage: 75 feet. A reduced street frontage may be approved, based on a
              finding that the proposed lot frontage will not hinder the future development of the site to
              densities proposed in the Comprehensive Plan.

       D.     Maximum Height: 35 feet.

       E.     Accessory buildings and uses shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements. If
              the accessory buildings and uses do not exceed 120 square feet or ten feet in height, and they
              are detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main buildings, the side and rear
              yard setbacks may be reduced to three feet. Minimum front and rear setback for ADUs is ten
              feet. Where an ADU is adjacent to an alley, it may meet the same setback as a garage taking
              alley access in B.1. above. Garage setbacks in B.1. above continue to apply regardless of
              relationship to an ADU.

(.06)  Off-Street Parking Requirements. As provided in Section 4.155.

(.07)  Signs. As provided in Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

(.08)  Corner Vision. As provided in Section 4.177.

(.09)  Prohibited Uses:

       A.     Uses of structures and land not specifically listed as permitted or conditionally permitted in
              the zone, or substantially similar to those uses, are prohibited in all FDA-H Zones.

       B.      The use of a trailer, travel trailer, or mobile coach as a residence.

       C.     Service stations for petroleum products.

(.10)  Block and access standards:

       1.      Maximum block perimeter: 1,800 feet.

       2.      Maximum spacing between streets or private drives for local access: 530 feet, unless waived by
              the Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads, freeways,
              existing buildings, topographic variations, or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone
              areas will prevent street extensions meeting this standard.

       3.      Maximum block length without pedestrian and bicycle crossing: 330 feet, unless waived by the
              Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads, freeways, existing
              buildings, topographic variations, or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas
              will prevent pedestrian and bicycle facility extensions meeting this standard.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 825, 10-15-2018;
Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:116.1
§ 4.122                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.122.  Residential Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide for standards and a simplified review process for
       small-scale urban low and medium density residential development. Developments in the 'R' zone
       are not intended to be Planned Developments.

(.02)  Residential Densities. Residential densities shall be determined using Table 1 of this section based
       on the Comprehensive Plan Map Density Range District.

                                            Table 1. R. Zone Density Calculations

               Comprehensive Plan Map
            Density Range Districta                 Max Density Per Acre b, c            Min. Density per Acred
            2—3                                                                       3                                                 2.4
            4—5                                                                       5                                                  4
            6—7                                                                     7.5                                                 6
            10—12                                                                12                                                9.6
               a. Accessory Dwelling Units are not included in density calculations.
               b. Middle housing units, except townhouses, are not included in calculating maximum
               density beyond 1 unit per lot or parcel.
               c. For Townhouses, the maximum density is the less of: (1) four times the maximum net
               density listed in Table 1; or (2) net density of 25 units per acre. If applying a maximum density
               for townhouses of four times the density listed in Table 1, the minimum density remains 80
               percent of the maximum density listed in Table 1.
               d. For Cottage Clusters, the minimum net density shall be no less than four units per acre.

(.03)  Lot Size Qualifications:

       A.     The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall not hold or cause to be held any interest in
               any adjacent property with the intent to avoid PDR regulations.
       B.      The lot or any part thereof shall not be an identified area of special concern as defined in the
               Comprehensive Plan.
       C.     The development area must be two acres or less in size. Development of larger properties
               shall be reviewed through planned development procedures.

(.04)  Principal Uses Permitted:

       A.     Single-Family Dwelling Units.

       B.      Middle Housing.
       C.     Multiple-Family Dwelling Units.

       D.     Public parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and grounds, tennis courts,
               and similar recreational uses, all of a non-commercial nature. Any principal building or
               public swimming pool shall be located not less than 45 feet from any other lot in a residential
               or RA-H zone.

Supp. No. 6                                                   CD4:116.2
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.122

       E.     Manufactured homes. [Note: Section 4.115 Standards Applying to Manufactured Housing
              in All Zones Where Manufactured Housing is Permitted deleted per by Ord. No. 538,
              2-21-2002.]

(.05)  Accessory Uses Permitted:
       A.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of  the aforesaid
              principal permitted uses, including accessory dwelling units allowed pursuant to Subsection
              4.113(.10), located on the same lot therewith.
       B.      Home occupations.
       C.     A private garage or parking area.
       D.     Temporary real estate signs, small announcement or professional signs, and subdivision
              signs, as provided in Sections 4.156.05, 4.156.07, 4.156.09, and 4.156.10.
       E.     Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
              removed immediately upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. In no
              case shall such buildings remain on the premises longer than ten days after the receipt of a
              Certificate of Occupancy or the expiration of construction permits.
       F.      Accessory buildings and uses shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements. If
              the accessory buildings and uses are detached and located behind the rear most line of the
              main buildings, at least one-half of the side yard setback is required. In no case shall a
              setback less than three feet be permitted unless a Reduced Setback Agreement has been
              approved and properly recorded, as provided in Section 4.113.
       G.     Livestock and farm animals shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Section 4.162.

(.06)  Other Standards:
       A.     Minimum lot width at building line:
              1.      For Townhouses: 20 feet.
              2.      For all other housing types: 60 feet.
       B.      Minimum street frontage of lot:
              1.      For Townhouses: 20 feet, except as provided in 3. below.
              2.      For all other housing types: 30 feet, except as provided in 3. below.
              3.      No street frontage is required when the lot fronts on an approved, platted private drive.

Supp. No. 6                                             CD4:116.3

                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.123

      C.    Minimumlotsize:
             1.      For single-family dwelling units, duplexes, and triplexes and two or three unit cluster
                    housing: 5,000 square feet.
             2.      For quadplexes, four-unit cluster housing, and cottage clusters: 7000 square feet.
             3.      For development with multi-family dwelling units: 10,000 square feet.

             4.      For townhouses: 1,250 square feet.

      D.    Minimumlotdepth: 70 feet.

      E.    Maximumbuildingorstructureheight: 35 feet.

      F.     Maximumlotcoverage:

                                                                    MaximumLotCoverage(percentof lotarea)
           LotSize                                                  of LargestBuilding/AllBuildingsA, B
           20,000 sf or more                                                 20/25
           More than 12,000 sf and less than 20,000 sf     25/30
           More than 8,000 sf up to 12,000 sf                    40/50
           More than 7,000 sf up to 8,000 sf                      45/55
           7,000 square feet or less                                      50/60
             A.     A building must be completely detached from the largest building to be considered a
                    separate building for the purpose of lot coverage calculations.
             B.      Cottage clusters are exempt from maximum lot coverage standards.

      G.    Blockandaccessstandards:
             1.      Maximum block perimeter in new land divisions: 1,800 feet.
             2.      Maximum spacing between streets or private drives for local access: 530 feet, unless
                    waivedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoarduponfindingthatbarrierssuchasrailroads,
                    freeways,existingbuildings,topographicvariations,ordesignatedSignificantResource
                    Overlay Zone areas will prevent street extensions meeting this standard.
             3.      Maximumblocklengthwithoutpedestrianandbicyclecrossing:330feet,unlesswaived
                    by the Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads,
                    freeways,existingbuildings,topographicvariations,ordesignatedSignificantResource
                    OverlayZoneareaswillpreventpedestrianandbicyclefacilityextensionsmeetingthis
                    standard.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 825, 10-15-2018;
Ord. No. 841, eff. 6-4-2020)

Section  4.123. Old Town Residential (OTR) Zone.

(.01)  Purpose:Thepurposeof thiszoneistoprovideforstandardsandasimplifiedreviewprocessfor
      small-scale residential development in the Old Town Neighborhood. Developments in the 'OTR'
      zone are not intended to be Planned Developments.

                                                        CD4:117
§ 4.123                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.02)  ResidentialDensities: This zone falls within the six to seven units per acre Comprehensive Plan
      DensityRangedistrictthusallowingamaximumof 7.5unitsperacreof GrossDevelopmentArea
      and requiring a minimum of six units per acre of Gross Development Area. Accessory Dwelling
      Units are not included in density calculations. Middle Housing, besides townhouses, is not
      includedinmaximumdensitycalculationbeyondoneunitperlot.ForTownhouses,themaximum
      net density is 25 units per acre.

(.03)  PrincipalUsesPermitted:
      A.     Single-Family Dwelling Units.
      B.      Middle Housing.

(.04)  AccessoryUsesPermittedtoSingle-FamilyDwellingUnitsandMiddleHousing:
      A.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of  the aforesaid
             principal permitted uses, including accessory dwelling units subject to the standards of
             Subsection 4.113(.10).
      B.      Home occupations.
      C.     A private garage or parking area.

      D.     Accessorybuildingsandusesshallconformtofrontandsideyardsetbackrequirements.If a
             non-dwelling unit accessory building ais detached and located behind the rear most line of
             themainbuildings,theside-yardsetbackmaybereducedbyhalf.Innocaseshallasetback
             less than three feet.

(.05)  LotStandards:
      A.    Minimumlotwidthatbuildingline: 35 feet, except as provided in 1. below.
             1.      Thereisnominimumlotwidthforindividualtownhouselots.Thetotalcumulativelot
                    width for townhouses attached to each other must be at least 35 feet.
      B.    Minimumstreetfrontageof lot:
             1.     Fortownhouses: 20 feet.
             2.     Forallotherhousingtypes: 35 feet.

      C.    Minimumlotsize:
             1.      For single-family dwelling units, duplexes, and two-unit cluster housing: 3,000 square
                    feet.
             2.      For triplexes and three-unit cluster housing: 5,000 square feet.
             3.      For quadplexes, four-unit cluster housing, and cottage clusters: 7,000 square feet.
             4.      Forindividualtownhouselots:1,500squarefeet;however,thecumulativeareaof lots
                    for all townhouses attached to each other shall be as follows:
                    a.      For two attached units: minimum 3,000 square feet
                    b.      For three attached units: minimum 5,000 square feet
                    c.      For four attached units: minimum 7,000 square feet.

                                                        CD4:118
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.123

(.06)  DesignandSitingStandards:

      A.     Developmentshallcomply(exceptasnotedin1.and2.below)withthestandardsof theOld
             TownResidentialDesignStandardsBookincludingbutnotlimitedtoarchitecturaldesign,
             height, setbacks, and lot coverage.
             1.      Anapplicantforaremodelof and/oradditiontostructuresexistingpriortoDecember
                   1,2017mayelecttomatchtheexistingdesignof thestructureratherthancomplywith
                   thearchitecturaldesignstandardsof theOldTownResidentialDesignStandardsBook
                   if all of the following are met:
                   a.      Theheightof thestructureremainsthesameandanyadditionsdonotexceedthe
                          height of the existing structure;
                   b.      The roof pitch on the existing portion of the structure remains the same and is
                          matched for additions involving facades facing a street or public open space;
                   c.      Allexteriormaterialsaresubstantiallysimilarinstyleandtexturetotheexisting
                          materials on the structure;
                   d.      Forfacadesof thestructurefacingastreetorpublicopenspace(doesnotinclude
                          alleys) all architectural elements, such as windows, doors, porches, dormers,
                          details, etc. are kept the same, or in the case of extending out a wall during an
                          addition, reproduced; and
                   e.      SetbacksandlotcoveragesetintheOldTownResidentialDesignStandardsare
                          met or maintain current legal non-conforming status.
             2.      Accessorystructureslessthan120squarefeetandtenfeetinheightarenotsubjectto
                   theOldTownResidentialDesignStandardsbutratherthestandardsof theunderlying
                   zone.

      B.      ThefollowingstandardsshallapplytoAccessoryDwellingUnits(ADU's)withinthe"OTR"
             Zonetoensuresmallerbulkof residentialbuildingsconsistentwiththehistoriccharacterof
             theneighborhood.Wherethesestandardsdifferfromthoseof Subsection4.113(.10),includ-
             ing size and design, these standards take precedence. All other standards of Subsection
             4.113(.10), including but not limited to number of ADU's and review process, continue to
             apply.
             1.     Size: ADU's shall not exceed 600 square feet of living space.
             2.     Design: ADU's shall be substantially the same exterior design and architecture (i.e.
                   siding,windows,color,roof pitch,doorsandroofingmaterials)astheprimarydwelling
                   unit on the property. ADU's shall be either:
                   a.      Detached single-story structures; or
                   b.      Over a detached garage meeting the following requirements:
                          i.       Thegarage/ADUstructureisamaximumoneandone-half storiestall,not
                                 exceeding a height of 20 feet; and
                          ii.      The primary dwelling unit on the property is one and one-half or two
                                 stories tall.

                                                      CD4:119
§ 4.123                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      C.     Rather than meet the standards prescribed above, applicants may elect to go through a Site
             Design review process before the Development Review Board for any housing type which
             include requirements to meet standards in Subsection 4.138(.05).

Section  4.124. Standards Applying to all Planned Development Residential Zones.

(.01)  PermittedUses:
      A.     Open Space.
      B.      Single-Family Dwelling Units.
      C.     Duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, townhouses.
      D.     Cluster housing, including cottage clusters.
      E.     Multiple-Family Dwelling Units.
      F.      Publicparks,playgrounds,recreationalandcommunitybuildingsandgrounds,tenniscourts,
             and similar recreational uses, all of a non-commercial nature, provided that any principal
             building or public swimming pool shall be located not less than 45 feet from any other lot.
      G.     Manufactured homes.

(.02)  Permittedaccessoryusestosinglefamilyandmiddlehousing:
      A.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of  the principal
             permitted uses listed above, and located on the same lot.
      B.      Livingquarterswithoutkitchenfacilitiesforpersonsemployedonthepremisesorforguests.
             Suchfacilitiesshallnotberentedorotherwiseusedasaseparatedwellingunlessapprovedas
             an accessory dwelling unit or duplex.
      C.     Accessory dwelling units, subject to the standards of Section 4.113 (.10).
      D.     Home occupations.

      E.     A private garage or parking area.
      G.     Temporary real estate signs, small announcement or professional signs, and subdivision
             signs, as provided in the provisions of Sections 4.156.05, 4.156.07, 4.156.09, and 4.156.10.
      H.     Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
             removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.
      I.      Accessory buildings and uses shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements. If
             theaccessorybuildingsandusesdonotexceed120squarefeetortenfeetinheight,andthey
             are detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main buildings, the side and rear
             yard setbacks may be reduced to three feet.
      J.       Livestock and farm animals, subject to the provisions of Section 4.162.

(.03)  Permittedaccessoryusesformultiple-familydwellingunits:
      A.     Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to any of  the aforesaid
             principal permitted uses, located on the same lot therewith.

                                                         CD4:120
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.124

      B.      Home occupations.

      C.     A private garage or parking area.

      D.     Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
             removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.

      E.     Accessory buildings and uses shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements. If
             theaccessorybuildingsandusesdonotexceed120squarefeetortenfeetinheight,andthey
             are detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main buildings, the side and rear
             yard setbacks may be reduced to three feet.

      F.      Livestock and farm animals, subject to the provisions of Section 4.162.

(.04)  UsespermittedsubjecttoConditionalUsePermitrequirements:

      A.     Public and semi-public buildings and/or structures essential to the physical and economic
             welfare of an area, such as fire stations, sub-stations and pump stations.

      B.      Public or private clubs, lodges or meeting halls. Public or private parks, playground, golf
             courses, driving ranges, tennis clubs, community centers and similar recreational uses.

      C.     Churches, public, private and parochial schools, public libraries and public museums.

      D.     NeighborhoodCommercialCenterslimitedtotheprovisionsof goodsandservicesprimarily
             fortheconvenienceof andsupportedbylocalresidents,andnotrequiringazonechangeto
             a commercial designation:
             1.      The site of a Neighborhood Commercial Center was proposed at the time of the
                    original application.
             2.      Such centers are of a scale compatible with the surrounding residential structures.
             3.      Such centers shall be compatible with the surrounding residential uses.
             4.      Thesiteof aNeighborhoodCommercialCentershallbeatleastone-quartermilefrom
                    any other sites zoned for commercial uses.
             5.      The site of a Neighborhood Commercial Center shall not exceed five percent of the
                    total area or one acre, whichever is less.
             6.      Thesiteof aNeighborhoodCommercialCentershallhavedirectaccesstoastreetof a
                    collector classification and shall have direct pedestrian access to the residential areas.
             7.      The site of  a Neighborhood Commercial Center shall not include more than one
                    quadrant of an intersection and shall not result in traffic of a nature which causes a
                    substantial adverse impact on the residential character of the planned development.

      E.     Commercial Recreation which is compatible with the surrounding residential uses and
             promotesthecreationof anattractive,healthful,efficientandstableenvironmentforliving,
             shoppingorworking.Allsuchusesexceptgolf coursesandtenniscourtsshallconformtothe
             requirements of subsection "D" (Neighborhood Commercial Centers), above.

      F.      Home businesses.

                                                       CD4:121
§ 4.124                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.05)  AppropriatePDRZoningDesignationandMaximumandMinimumDensitybasedonComprehen-
       sivePlanDensityRangeDistrict:

              Table 1: PDR Zoning Designation and Maximum and Minimum Density based on
                                      Comprehensive Plan Density Range District

                                      Comprehensive
                                         PlanMap
           Zoning                     DensityRange
           Designation                    District a              Max.DensityperAcre b, c            Min.DensityperAcre d
           PDR-1                                0-1                                           1                                            .8
           PDR-2                                2-3                                           3                                           2.4
           PDR-3                                4-5                                           5                                             4
           PDR-4                                6-7                                         7.5                                           6
           PDR-5                              10-12                                        12                                          9.6
           PDR-6                              16-20                                        20                                           16
           PDR-7                            Over 20          AsapprovedbyZoningOrder/Stage                       80% of Max
                                                                    1 Master Plan, at least 25                      Density
              a. Accessory Dwelling Units are not included for calculating density.

              b. Middle Housing, besides, townhouses, is not included in calculating maximum density
              beyond one unit per lot or parcel.

              c. For townhouses, the maximum density is the less of: (1) four times the maximum net
              densitylistedinTable1;or(2)netdensityof 25unitsperacre.If applyingamaximumdensity
              for townhouses of four times the density listed in Table 1, the minimum density remains 80
              percent of the maximum density listed in Table 1.

              d. For Cottage Clusters, the minimum net density shall be no less than four units per acre.

(.06)  UnitCountLimitations. Unit count limitations are calculated as follows:

       A.     Maximum Unit Count. Maximum unit count at build out of Stage I Master Plan area: is
              calculatedbytakingtheGrossDevelopmentAreamultipliedbyMaximumDensityperAcre
              statedinTable1of thisCodesection,plusanydensitytransferredfromSROZareaspursuant
              to Subsection 4.139.11(.02). For example, any number greater than four and less than five
              shall be rounded down to four.

       B.      Minimum Unit Count. Minimum unit count at build out of Stage I Master Plan area: 80
              percent of maximum unit count described in A. above.

       C.     If theStageIMasterPlanareaissubjecttomorethanoneComprehensivePlanMapDensity
              RangeDistrictandZoningDesignation,calculationsforareasof differingdensitiesshallbe
              doneseparatelyandthensummedtogether,andthefinalsummednumberroundeddownto
              the nearest whole number.

(.07)  LotStandards:

                                                             CD4:122
                                       PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                     § 4.124

Table 2: Lot Standards for All PDR Zoned Lots
                   Minimum                          Maximum Lot Coverage            Minimum Lot Width at                           Maximum
                    Lot Size        Setbacks        (percent of lot area) of        building Line/Minimum           Minimum        Building
Zoning              (square                           Largest Building/All         Street Frontage of LotDE         Lot Depth      Height (feet)
Designation         feet)AB                                 BuildingsC                        (feet)                  (feet)
PDR-1                 20,000                                  20/25                                     80/80                            100
PDR-2                  7,000                                 25/30  (more  than  12,000 and less than 20,000 sf lot) 60/30                             70
                                                  40/50 (more than 8,000 up
                                                        to 12,000 sf lot)
                                   Per Section    45/55 (7,000 to 8,000 sf lot)
PDR-3                  4,500                                                  50/60                                    40/40F                            60 4.113 (.02)35
PDR-4                  3,000                                                  75/75                                    35/35F                            60
PDR-5                  2,000                                                  75/75                                     30/30                             60
PDR-6                    NA                                                    75/75                                     30/30                             60
PDR-7                    NA                                                    75/75                                     30/30                             60
        A. For townhouses the minimum lot size in PDR-1 through PDR-5 zones is 1,500 square feet.

        B. For the PDR 3 through PDR 7 zones, the minimum lot size for triplexes and three-unit cluster
        housing is 5,000 square feet; the minimum lot size for quadplexes, four-unit cluster housing, and
        cottage clusters is 7,000 square feet.

        C. A building must be completely detached from the largest building to be considered a separate
        building for the purpose of lot coverage calculations. Cottage clusters are exempt from maximum
        lot coverage standards.

        D. Lot frontage may be on a public street or approved, platted private drive.

        E. For townhouses the minimum lot width at building line and minimum street frontage is 20 feet
        in all PDR zones.

        F. Lot frontage may be reduced to 24 feet when the lot fronts a cul-de-sac.

(.08)  Adjustments to Ensure Minimum Density is Met. In development not involving Multi-Family
        Dwelling Units, if demonstrated by the applicant that it is not physically possible to accommodate
        the minimum number of units at the required minimum lot size and the minimum open space, the
        following adjustments, A.—B., shall be made to the minimum extent necessary to enable minimum
        density to be met. To prioritize the provision of required open space, adjustments to minimum lot
        size, width, and depth shall be used to the extent allowed, as described in A. below, prior to any
        adjustment to open space requirements as described in B. below.

        A.     Adjustments to Minimum Lot Size, Width, and Depth: Reduce minimum lot size of up to 20
                percent of the residential lots, rounded consistent with Subsection (.06) above or one lot for
                a four-lot subdivision, by up to 20 percent. For example, the potential adjustment, if
                determined necessary, for a 100- lot subdivision in the PDR-4 zone would be to reduce 20 lots
                to as low as 2,400 square feet (a 20 percent reduction of the 3,000 square foot minimum lot
                size). Also reduce the minimum lot width and minimum lot depth by up to 20 percent as
                necessary to allow the reduction of lot size.

        B.      Adjustment to Open Space Area. Reduce the amount of open space area required pursuant to
                Subsection 4.113(.01). Reduce non-usable open space to the extent possible prior to usable

Supp. No. 6                                                        CD4:123
§ 4.124                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              open space required by Subsection 4.113(.01)C.3. After any adjustment to open space, all
              subdivisions with ten or more units must still include a minimum of one usable, programmed
              open space of at least 2,000 square feet meeting the requirements of Subsection 4.113(.01)C.3.
              Subdivisions less than ten units shall require one usable open space of at least 1,000 square
              feet meeting the same requirements.

(.09)  Block and access standards:
       1.      Maximum block perimeter in new land divisions: 1,800 feet.
       2.      Maximum spacing between streets or private drives for local access: 530 feet, unless waived by
              the Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads, freeways,
              existing buildings, topographic variations, or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone
              areas will prevent street extensions meeting this standard.
       3.      Maximum block length without pedestrian and bicycle crossing: 330 feet, unless waived by the
              Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads, freeways, existing
              buildings, topographic variations, or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas
              will prevent pedestrian and bicycle facility extensions meeting this standard.
(.10)  Signs. Per the requirements of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

(.11)  Parking. Per the requirements of Section 4.155.

(.12)  Corner Vision Clearance. Per the requirements of Section 4.177.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 825, 10-15-2018;
Ord. No. 841, eff. 6-4-2020)

Section  4.125.  V—Village Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The Village (V) zone is applied to lands within the Residential Village Comprehensive
       Plan Map designation. The Village zone is the principal implementing tool for the Residential
       Village Comprehensive Plan designation. It is applied in accordance with the Villebois Village
       Master Plan and the Residential Village Comprehensive Plan Map designation as described in the
       Comprehensive Plan.
       A.     The Village zone provides for a range of intensive land uses and assures the most efficient use
              of land.
       B.      The Village zone is intended to assure the development of bicycle and pedestrian-sensitive,
              yet auto-accommodating, communities containing a range of residential housing types and
              densities, mixed-use buildings, commercial uses in the Village Center and Neighborhood
              Centers, and employment opportunities.
       C.     The Village zone, together with the Architectural Pattern Book and Community Elements
              Book, is intended to provide quantitative and objective review guidelines.

(.02)  Permitted Uses. Examples of principle uses that are typically permitted:
       A.     Single Family Dwellings.
       B.      Accessory Dwelling Units, subject to the standards of Section 4.113(.10)

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:124
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.125

C.     Duplexes, Triplexes, and Quadplexes.
D.     Row Houses.

E.     Multi-Family Dwellings.
F.      Cluster Housing, including Cottage Clusters.

G.     ResidentialFacilities,ResidentialHomes,andCommunityHousingdevelopedtoimplement
      ORS 426.508.
H.     Non-commercial parks, plazas, playgrounds, recreational facilities, community buildings
      and grounds, tennis courts, and other similar recreational and community uses owned and
      operated either publicly or by an owners association.

I.      Commercial uses within the Village Center, subject to the standards of [Section 4.125](.06)
      Standards Applying to Commercial Uses and similar to the following:
      1.     Salesandservicingof consumergoods:
             Bicycle shop.
             Bookstore.
             Clothing store.
             Electronics and appliances store.
             Florist.
             Furniture store.
             Jeweler.
             Pet shop.
      2.     Foodandsundries:
             Bakery.
             Butcher shop.
             Convenience store.
             Delicatessen.
             Drugstore.
             Gifts Store.
             Hardware store.
      3.     Lifestyleandrecreation:
             Art gallery.
             Barbershop or hair salon.
             Boutique shops and other specialty retail.
             Coffee shops including outdoor eating areas.
             Health club or gymnasium.
             Restaurants and pubs including outdoor eating areas.

                                                 CD4:125
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     Dance or martial arts studio.
              4.     ServiceCommercial:
                     Banking and investment services.
                     Child day care.
                     Custom tailoring.
                     Dry cleaners.
                     Photo processing.
                     Postal service.
                     Reproduction services.
                     Laundromat.
                     Locksmith.
                     Telecommunications services.
                     Upholstery shop.
              5.     GeneralOffice:
                     Computer and technology companies.
                     Governmental services.
                     Health services.
                     Insurance agencies.
                     Nonprofit organizations.
                     Professional-type services.
                     Real estate offices.
                     Secretarial services.
                     Travel agencies.
       J.       Commercial uses within a Neighborhood Center, subject to the standards of  [Section
              4.125](.06) Standards Applying to Commercial Uses, and similar to the following:
              Bakery.
              Barbershop and/or hair salon.
              Bookstore.
              Coffee shop including outdoor eating areas.
              Convenience store.
              Dry cleaners.
              Florist.
              Newsstand.
              Postal services.
              Service oriented offices.

                                                         CD4:126
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

             Wine bar.
      K.     Group Living Facility.

(.03)  PermittedAccessoryUses.

      A.     Uses,buildingsandstructurescustomarilyincidentaltoanyof theprincipalpermitteduses
             and located on the same lot.
      B.      Home Occupations.
      C.     Structured parking, garages, and parking areas.
      D.     Temporary Uses per Section 4.163.
      E.     Signs subject to the standards of [Section 4.125](.12) Signage and Wayfinding.

      F.      Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
             removed immediately upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. In no
             case shall such buildings remain on the premises longer than ten days after the receipt of a
             Certificate of Occupancy or the expiration of construction permits.

(.04)  ConditionalUses.Applicationsforthefollowingconditionalusesshallbeprocessedinaccordance
      with the procedures listed in Section 4.512:
      A.     Public and semi-public buildings and/or structures essential to the physical and economic
             welfare of an area, such as fire stations, utility sub-stations and pump stations.
      B.      Public or private clubs, lodges or meeting halls.

      C.     Public or private libraries and museums.
      D.     Religious institutions.
      E.     Transit Stations.

      F.      Community Centers.
      G.     Conference Centers.

      H.     Non-commercial community buildings and grounds, and other similar community uses,
             owned and operated either publicly or by an owners association.
      I.      Commercial parks, plazas, playgrounds, recreational facilities, community buildings and
             grounds, tennis courts, and other similar recreational and community uses owned and
             operated privately.

      J.       Schools (public, private, or commercial).
      K.     Theaters.

      L.     Home Business.
      M.    Commercial Parking Facility.
      N.     Light Manufacturing/Research and Development located within the Village Center.

      O.     Overnight Lodging Facility.

                                                        CD4:127
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      P.      Grocery Store or Specialty Grocery Store.

(.05)  Development Standards Applying to All Developments in the Village Zone. In addition to other
      applicableprovisionsof theWilsonvillePlanningandLandDevelopmentOrdinance,alldevelop-
      mentintheVillagezoneshallbesubjecttoTablesV-1throughV-4,andtothefollowing.If thereis
      a conflict between the provisions of the Village zone and other portions of the Code, then the
      provisions of this section shall apply.

      A.    Block,Alley,PedestrianandBicycleStandards:

             1.      MaximumBlockPerimeter:1,800feet,unlesstheDevelopmentReviewBoardmakesa
                    finding that barriers such as existing buildings, topographic variations, or designated
                    Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas will prevent a block perimeter from meeting
                    this standard.

             2.      Maximumspacingbetweenstreetsorprivatedriveforlocalaccess:530feet,unlessthe
                    Development Review Board makes a finding that barriers such as existing buildings,
                    topographic variations, or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas will
                    prevent street extensions from meeting this standard. Under such circumstances,
                    interveningpedestrianandbicycleaccessshallbeprovided,withamaximumspacingof
                    330 feet from those local streets or private drives, unless the Development Review
                    Boardmakesafindingthatbarrierssuchasexistingbuildings,topographicvariations,
                    or designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas will prevent pedestrian and
                    bicycle facility extensions from meeting this standard.

      B.    Access:Alllotswithaccesstoapublicstreet,andanalley,shalltakevehicularaccessfromthe
             alley to a garage or parking area, except as determined by the City Engineer.

      C.     Trailers,traveltrailers,mobilecoaches,oranyalteredvariationthereof shallnotbeusedfor
             thepurposeof conductingatradeorcalling,orforstorageof material,unlessapprovedfor
             such purpose as a temporary use.

      D.    Fences:

             1.     GeneralProvisions:
                    a.      Fencing in the Village Zone shall be in compliance with the Master Fencing
                          Program in the adopted Architectural Pattern Book for the appropriate SAP.

                    b.      Whentwoormorepropertieswithdifferentsetbacksabut,thepropertywiththe
                          largestfrontyardsetbackrequirementshallbeusedtodeterminethelengthand
                          height of the shared side yard fence, as required by Section 4.125(.05)(D)(1)(a),
                          above.
                          Example: Building 'A' has 20' front yard setback and Building 'B' has zero front
                          yardsetback.SinceBuilding'A'hasthelargerfrontyardsetback,itshallbeused
                          todeterminetheheightandlengthof thesharedsideyardfence.Itissixfeettall,
                          but is reduced to three feet in front of Building 'A's building line.

                                                       CD4:128
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.125

             c.      TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmay,intheirdiscretion,requiresuchfencingas
                    deemed necessary to promote and provide traffic safety, noise mitigation, and
                    nuisance abatement, and the compatibility of different uses permitted on adja-
                    cent lots of the same zone and on adjacent lots of different zones.

      2.     Residential:

             a.      The maximum height of  any fence located in the required front yard of  a
                    residential development shall not exceed three feet.

             b.      Fences on residential lots shall not include chain link, barbed wire, razor wire,
                    electricallychargedwire,orbeconstructedof sheathingmaterialsuchasplywood
                    orflakeboard.Fencesinresidentialareasthatprotectwetlands,orothersensitive
                    areas, may be chain link.

E.     Recreational Area in Multi-family Residential and Mixed Use Developments.

      1.      TheRecreationalArearequirementisintendedtoprovideadequaterecreationalame-
             nities for occupants of multiple family developments and mixed use developments
             where the majority of the developed square footage is to be in residential use.

      2.      RecreationalAreaisdefinedasthecommonareaof alllawns,communitygardens,play
             lots, plazas, court yards, interior and exterior swimming pools, ball courts, tennis
             courts,exerciserooms,healthandexercisefacilities,libraries,internet/electronicmedia
             rooms,decksandothersimilarareasforcommonrecreationaluses.RecreationalArea
             may include Parks required under the Villebois Village Master Plan, and any usable
             parkareasnotshowninsuchplan.Privateareasunderthisdefinition,definedasthose
             areas that are accessible only by a single owner or tenant, or commercial or retail
             recreationfacilitiesservingthegeneralpublic,shallnotconstituteorcontributetothe
             measurement of Recreational Area.

      3.      Avarietyof ageappropriatefacilitiesshallbeincludedinthemixof RecreationalArea
             facilities.

      4.      Recreational Area shall be calculated at the following ratios:

             a.      At the SAP Level—195 square feet per residential unit.

             b.      At the PDP level—an additional 30 square feet per residential unit

      3.      OutdoorLivingAreashallbeconsideredtobepartof theOpenSpacerequirementin
             Section 4.125(.08).

F.      Fire Protection:

      1.      Allstructuresshallincludearatedfiresuppressionsystem(i.e.,sprinklers),asapproved
             by the Fire Marshal.

                                                CD4:129

                                           PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                             § 4.125

                                                                                                                                                                        Table V-1: Development Standards21

Building Type                                                               Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.)   Min. Lot Width (ft.)       Min. Lot Depth (ft.)           Max. Lot Coverage    Min.    Building Frontage Max.         Bldg. Height 9                                       Setbacks 10, 13, 20                                              Alley-Loaded Garage        Street-Loaded Garage
                                                                                                                                                                  (note)                 Width 10, 12                   (ft.)             Front Min. (ft.)  Front     Max.19 (ft.)                      Rear Min. (ft.)             Side Min. (ft.)       (note)                    (note)
                                                                                                                                                                                            (%age)
  Commercial Buildings—Village Center    14                        NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          90                         60                       NR 3                        5                         NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Hotels—Village Center    14                                                  NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          80                         60                       NR 3                       15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Mixed Use Buildings—Village Center    14                          NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          90                         60                       NR 3                        8                         NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Multi-Family Dwellings—Village Center 14                                                                 NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          80                         45                         5 4                         15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA

  Row Houses 11—Village Center    14                                    NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          80                         45                         5 4                         10                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Commercial Buildings                                                        NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          60                         45                        NR                        15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Mixed Use Buildings                                                          NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          60                         45                        NR                        15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Multi-Family Dwellings                                                     NR                       NR                       NR                                        1                          60                         45                         8 4                         15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Row Houses 11                                                                     NR                        15                         50                                          1                          80                         45                         8 5                         15                        NR                       NR                       NR                       NA
  Single-Family Dwellings and Duplexes                           2,250                       35                         50                                          2                        60 16                       35                      12 5, 6                     20 6                         5                         5 15                                         7                                      8,17,18
Notes:  NR  No Requirement
                   NA  Not Allowed
       1  Lot < 8,000sf: NR; Lot >8,000sf: 80% (Max. Lot Coverage)
       2  Small lots: 75%, Medium Lots: 65%, Standard and Large Lots: 55%, Estate Lots: 45% Maximum Lot Coverage
             On lots where detached accessory buildings are built, maximum lot coverage may be increased by 10%.
       3  Bay windows, balconies, and other structural building projections above 8 ft. may encroach up to 5 ft. into the Public Way; canopies, awnings, and other non-structural projections may encroach up to 8 ft. into the Public Way.
       4  Porches, stairs, stoops, decks, canopies, balconies, bay windows, chimneys, awnings, and other building projections may encroach up to the Public Way.
       5  Porches, stoops, decks, canopies, balconies, bay windows, chimneys, awnings, and other building projections may encroach to within 8 ft. of the Public Way. Stairs may encroach to the Public Way.
       6  For Standard, or Large Lots on Collector Avenues, front setbacks are 20 ft. min., (13' setback to porch), side street setbacks are 15' (8' setback to porch). Pie-shaped lots or lots with significant trees or grade banks at frontage have no maximum front setback.
       7  The garage setback from alley shall be between 3 and 5 foot or, when as optional parking space is located between the garage and the alley, shall be 18 ft. minimum. Lots with important trees, as identified in the Master Plan, or grade differences at the alley, affecting garage location shall be exempt from this requirement.

       8  Street-loaded garages shall be a minimum 20 ft. front setback to face of garage, and located a minimum of 5 ft. behind main façade of the associated dwelling unit.
       9  Vertical encroachments are allowed up to ten additional feet, for up to 10% of the building footprint; vertical encroachments shall not be habitable space.
    10  For Village Center buildings with lots fronting two or more streets, at least two facades shall be subject to the minimum frontage width and front setback requirements.
    11  Row Houses are typically attached, but may be detached within the Village Center Boundary. When attached, no more than ten units shall be contiguous along a street edge. When row houses are detached, the Minimum Building Frontage Width is 65%. The
         Minimum Building Frontage Width for detached row houses may be less than 65% on corner lots or to accommodate the curve radius of street frontage, public utility easements, important trees, grade differences, public open space requirements, or as otherwise
         approved by the DRB.
    12  See Definitions, 4.001, for measurement of Minimum Building Frontage Width.
    13  Front Setback is measured as the offset of the front lot line or a vehicular or pedestrian access easement line. On lots with alleys, Rear Setback shall be measured from the rear lot line abutting the alley.
    14  See Figure 2A—Village Center Boundary & Land Use Plan in the Villebois Village Master Plan for areas included within the Village Center.
    15  On Estate Lots and Large Lots with frontage 70 ft. or wider, the minimum combined side yard setbacks shall total 15 ft. with a minimum of 5 ft. On Small and Medium Lots, minimum side setback shall be 0 ft. or as required by Building Code.
    16  For cluster housing with lots arranged on a courtyard, frontage shall be measured at the front door face of the building adjacent to a public right-of-way or a public pedestrian access easement linking the courtyard with the Public Way.
    17  Dwellings on lots without alley access shall be at least 36 feet wide.
    18  Single-family dwellings and duplexes with front-loaded garages are limited to one standard-sized driveway/apron.
    19  Maximum setbacks may be increased as necessary to accommodate deeper porches, building code, public utility easements or public open space requirements.
    20  Lots are categorized as small, medium, standard, large or estate as shown in the Pattern Book.
    21  Subsection 4.125(.23) contains special provisions for redevelopment to add middle housing units.

Supp. No. 6                                                              CD4:131

                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.125

(.06)  Standards Applying To Commercial Uses:

       A.     All commercial uses shall be subject to the following:

              1.      A Neighborhood Center shall only be located at a Neighborhood Commons.
              2.      The total area of all commercial uses in a Neighborhood Center shall not exceed 3,500
                     sq. ft. (excluding residential uses, home occupations, or home businesses).
              3.      Commercial use shall not include "drive-through" facilities.
              4.      A commercial use shall be adjacent to a street.
              5.      All businesses, service or processing, shall be conducted wholly within a completely
                     enclosed building; except for off-street parking and off-street loading. Except, however,
                     that exterior displays, outdoor dining areas, or exterior sales may be specifically
                     authorized through temporary use permit or development permit approval, subject to
                     conditions of approval. Exterior sales that may be permitted are those that are limited
                     in time duration, such as sidewalk sales, grand openings, or farmers' markets. Said areas
                     must maintain the minimum required clear space accessible to pedestrian movement on
                     pathways and/or sidewalks. See the following figure:

                                          Figure  V-1:  Exterior  Displays/Out-
                                                      door Dining

              6.      Except as may be approved through the processes noted in Section [4.125](.07)(A)(5),
                     above, all commercial uses shall meet the performance standards specified in Section
                     4.135(.05).

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:133
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.07)  General Regulations—Off-Street Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.   Except as required by
       Subsections (A) through (D), below, the requirements of Section 4.155 shall apply within the
       Village zone.
       A.     General Provisions:
              1.      The provision and maintenance of off-street parking spaces is a continuing obligation
                     of  the property owner. The standards set forth herein shall be considered by the
                     Development Review Board as minimum criteria.
              2.      The Board shall have the authority to grant variances or refinements to these standards
                     in keeping with the purposes and objectives set forth in this zone.

       B.      Off-Street Parking Requirements:
              1.      Table V-2, Off-Street Parking Requirements, below, shall be used to determine the
                     maximum parking standards and bicycle parking standards for noted land uses. The
                     maximum number of required parking spaces shown in Table V-2 shall be determined
                     by rounding to the nearest whole parking space.
       C.     Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements:
              1.      Loading facilities shall be sited at the rear or side whenever practicable, and if adjacent
                     to a residential use, shall be screened. Screening shall match the adjacent residential
                     development in terms of quality of materials and design. Such screening shall minimize
                     light  glare  and  noise  levels  affecting  adjacent  residential  uses.  See  also  Section
                     4.155(.03)(B).
       D.     Bicycle Parking Requirements:
              1.      Purpose: Bicycle parking is required for most use categories to encourage the use of
                     bicycles by providing safe and convenient places to park bicycles for short and long
                     stays.
                     a.      Short-term bicycle parking is intended to encourage shoppers, customers, mes-
                            sengers, and other visitors to use bicycles by providing a convenient and readily
                            accessible place to park bicycles.
                     b.      Long-term bicycle parking is intended to provide employees, students, residents,
                            commuters and others who generally stay at a site for several hours, a secure and
                            weather-protected place to park bicycles. The intent of the long-term standards is
                            to provide bicycle parking within a reasonable distance in order to encourage
                            bicycle use.
              2.      General Provisions:
                     a.      Required Bicycle Parking:
                            i.       The required minimum number of  bicycle parking spaces for each use
                                    category is shown in Table V-2, Parking Requirements, below. Bicycle
                                    parking is not required for uses not listed.
                            ii.      Bicycle parking spaces are not required for accessory uses. If a primary use
                                    is listed in Table V-2, bicycle parking is not required for the accessory use.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:134
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.125

                             iii.     When there are two or more primary uses on a site, the required bicycle
                                    parking for the site is the sum of  the required bicycle parking for the
                                    individual primary uses.

              3.      Bicycle Parking Standards:
                     a.      Short-term bicycle parking. Required short-term bicycle parking shall meet the
                             following standards:
                             i.       Short-term bicycle parking shall be provided in lockers or racks that meet
                                    the standards of this section.
                             ii.      Short-term bicycle parking shall be located either within 30 feet of the main
                                    entrance to the building; or inside a building, in a location that is easily
                                    accessible for bicycles.
                             iii.     If 10 or more short-term bicycle spaces are required, then at least 50 percent
                                    of the required short-term bicycle spaces shall be covered and meet the
                                    standards of this section.
                     b.      Long-term bicycle parking. Required long-term bicycle parking shall meet the
                             following standards:
                             i.       Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided in racks or lockers that meet
                                    the standards of this section.
                             ii.      Long-term bicycle parking shall be located on the site or in an area where
                                    the closest point is within 300 feet of the site.
                             iii.     At least 50 percent of required long-term bicycle parking shall be covered in
                                    compliance with the standards of this section.
                             iv.     To provide security, long-term bicycle parking shall be in at least one of the
                                    following locations;
                                    •        In a locked room or locker
                                    •        In an area that is enclosed by a fence with a locked gate. The fence
                                           shall be either eight feet high, or be floor-to-ceiling, subject to review
                                           and approval of a building permit;
                                    •        In an area that is visible from employee work areas or within view of
                                           an attendant or security guard;
                                    •        In a dwelling unit or dormitory unit. If long-term bicycle parking is
                                           provided in a dwelling unit or dormitory unit, neither racks nor
                                           lockers shall be required.
                     c.      Bicycle Lockers, Racks and Cover (Weather Protection):
                             i.       Where required bicycle parking is provided in lockers, the lockers shall be
                                    securely anchored.
                             ii.      Covered bicycle parking, as required by this section, shall be provided
                                    inside buildings, under roof overhangs or awnings, in bicycle lockers, or
                                    within or under other structures. Where required covered bicycle parking is

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:135
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                              not within a building or locker, the cover must be permanent, designed to
                                              protect the bicycle from rainfall and provide seven foot minimum overhead
                                              clearance.

                                                                             Table V-2: Off Street Parking Requirements

                                                                                                                         Bicycle                    Bicycle
                                                                                                                      Short-term                  Long-term
                                 Permitted or Conditional Use                     Max.Vehicle Spaces                    (Spaces)                   (Spaces)
                                 Permitted Uses
                                      Single-Family Detached
                                     Dwellings                                                   NR                        NR                        NR
                                      Single-Family Accessory
                                     Dwelling Units                                          NR                        NR                        NR
                                      Middle Housing 2                                     NR                        NR                        NR
                                      Multi-Family Dwellings               1.2 spaces/studio                              1 per                 1 per 4 units
                                                                                      unit and 2 spaces/                20 units                  Min. of 2
                                                                                       non-studio unit                 Min. of 2
                                      Community Housing                           1 per unit                   NR                       1 per
                                                                                                                                                  8 residents
                                                                                                                                                  Min. of 2
                                 Commercial Uses
                                      Convenience Store                               5/1,000 sf                  1 per                               1 per
                                                                                                                        5,000 sf                   12,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 2
                                      Restaurant/Pub                                   10/1,000 sf                 1 per                              1 per
                                                                                                                        5,000 sf                   12,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 2
                                      Child Day Care                                      0.3 per
                                                                                          student/staff               None                      1 per 10,000 sf
                                                                                                                                                  Min. of 2
                                      Medical/Dental                                    4/1,000 sf                  1 per                             1 per
                                                                                                                        40,000 sf                  70,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 2
                                 All other commercial uses                       4/1,000 sf                  1 per                                    1 per
                                                                                                                        10,000 sf                  40,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 2
                                 Conditional Uses
                                      Schools                                                    0.3 per
                                                                                          student/staff              0.3 per student/staff              0.2 per classroom
                                      Recreational Facilities                        5/1,000 sf 1                 1 per                               1 per
                                                                                                                        3,000 sf                    3,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 4                  Min. of 4
                                      Conference Center                             0.5 per seat          1 per 15 seats
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2           1 per 40 seats Min. of 10
                                        Library/Museum                                 4/1,000 sf                  1 per                              1 per
                                                                                                                        1,000 sf                    1,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 6                  Min. of 6
                                      Religious Institution                           .5 per seat                  1 per                              1 per
                                                                                                                        2,000 sf                    4,000 sf
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 2
                                      Theater                                                 .5 per seat                  1 per 20 seats           50 seats 1 per
                                                                                                                       Min. of 2                  Min. of 4

Supp. No. 6                                                                 CD4:136
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                            § 4.125

                                                      Table V-2: Off Street Parking Requirements

                                                                                                Bicycle               Bicycle
                                                                                              Short-term            Long-term
                          Permitted or Conditional Use                     Max.Vehicle Spaces  (Spaces)              (Spaces)
                               Overnight Lodging Facility              1.5 per room       1 per 20 rooms               1 per
                                                                                               Min. of 2            20 rooms
                                                                                                                    Min. of 2
                               Light  Manufacturing/Research                                                           1 per
                             and Development                                 4/1000 sf                   1 per 10,000 sf 40,000 sf
                                                                                               Min. of 2            Min. of 2
                               All other Conditional Uses                 4/1000 sf                   1 per            1 per
                                                                                               10,000 sf             40,000 sf
                                                                                               Min. of 2            Min. of 2

                             Notes:

                             1 1/1,000 sf min. for court facilities

                             2No additional off-street parking is required for middle housing created through the addition to, or
                             conversion of, an existing single-family detached dwelling.

                             NR No requirement

(.08)  Open Space. Open space shall be provided as follows:

       A.     In all residential developments and in mixed-use developments where the majority of the
              developed square footage is to be in residential use, at least 25 percent of the area shall be
              open space, excluding street pavement and surface parking. In multi-phased developments,
              individual phases are not required to meet the 25 percent standard as long as an approved
              Specific Area Plan demonstrates that the overall development shall provide a minimum of 25
              percent open space. Required yard areas shall not be counted towards the required open
              space area.

       B.      Open space area required by this Section may, at the discretion of the Development Review
              Board, be protected by a conservation easement or dedicated to the City, either rights in fee
              or easement, without altering the density or other development standards of the proposed
              development. Provided that, if  the dedication is for public park purposes, the size and
              amount of  the proposed dedication shall meet the criteria of  the City of  Wilsonville
              standards. The square footage of any land, whether dedicated or not, which is used for open
              space shall be deemed a part of the development site for the purpose of computing density or
              allowable lot coverage. See SROZ provisions, Section 4.139.10.

       C.     The Development Review Board may specify the method of assuring the long-term protec-
              tion and maintenance of open space and/or recreational areas. Where such protection or
              maintenance are the responsibility of a private party or homeowners' association, the City
              Attorney shall review and approve any pertinent bylaws, covenants, or agreements prior to
              recordation.

Supp. No. 6                                                 CD4:137
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.09)  Street and Access Improvement Standards:
       A.     Except as noted below, the provisions of Section 4.177 shall apply within the Village zone:
              1.      General Provisions:
                      a.      All street alignment and access improvements shall conform to Figures 7, 8, 9A,
                             and 9B of the Villebois Village Master Plan, or as refined in an approved Specific
                             Area Plan, Preliminary Development Plan, or Final Development Plan, and the
                             following standards:
                             i.       All street improvements shall conform to the Public Works Standards and
                                     the Transportation Systems Plan, and shall provide for the continuation of
                                     streets through proposed developments to adjoining properties or subdivi-
                                     sions, according to the Master Plan.
                             ii.      All streets shall be developed according to the Master Plan.
              2.      Intersections of streets:
                      a.      Angles: Streets shall intersect one another at angles not less than 90 degrees,
                             unless existing development or topography makes it impractical.
                      b.      Intersections: If the intersection cannot be designed to form a right angle, then the
                             right-of-way and paving within the acute angle shall have a minimum of a 30 foot
                             centerline radius and said angle shall not be less than 60 degrees. Any angle less
                             than 90 degrees shall require approval by the City Engineer after consultation
                             with the Fire District.
                      c.      Offsets: Opposing intersections shall be designed so that no offset dangerous to
                             the traveling public is created. Intersections shall be separated by at least:
                             i.       1,000 ft. for major arterials
                             ii.      600 ft. for minor arterials
                             iii.     100 ft. for collectors
                             iv.     50 ft. for local streets
                      d.      Curb Extensions:
                             i.       Curb extensions at intersections shall be shown on the Specific Area Plans
                                     required in Subsection 4.125(.18)(C) through (F), below, and shall:
                                     •        Not obstruct bicycle lanes on collector streets.

Supp. No. 6                                                 CD4:138
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

                                  •        Provide a minimum 20 foot wide clear distance between curb exten-
                                         sions at all local residential street intersections, meet minimum turn-
                                         ing radius requirements of the Public Works Standards, and shall
                                         facilitate fire truck turning movements as required by the Fire Dis-
                                         trict.

             3.     StreetGrades: Street grades shall be a maximum of six percent on arterials and eight
                    percentforcollectorandlocalstreets.Wheretopographicconditionsdictate,gradesin
                    excess of eight percent, but not more than 12 percent, may be permitted for short
                    distances,asapprovedbytheCityEngineer,wheretopographicconditionsorexisting
                    improvements warrant modification of these standards.

             4.     CenterlineRadiusStreetCurves: The minimum centerline radius street curves shall be
                    as follows:
                    a.     Arterialstreets: 600 feet, but may be reduced to 400 feet in commercial areas, as
                           approved by the City Engineer.
                    b.     Collectorstreets:600feet,butmaybereducedtoconformwiththePublicWorks
                           Standards, as approved by the City Engineer.
                    c.     Localstreets: 75 feet

             5.     Rights-of-way:
                    a.      See Section 4.125(.09)(A), above.

             6.     Accessdrives:
                    a.      See Section 4.125(.09)(A), above.
                    b.      16 feet for two-way traffic.

             7.     ClearVisionAreas:
                    a.      See Section 4.125(.09)(A), above.

             8.     VerticalClearance:
                    a.      See Section 4.125(.09)(A), above.

             9.     InterimImprovementStandard:
                    a.      See Section 4.125(.09)(A), above.

(.10)  SidewalkandPathwayImprovementStandards:

      A.     The provisions of Section 4.154 and 4.177(.03) shall apply within the Village zone.

(.11)  Landscaping,ScreeningandBuffering:

      A.     Except as noted below, the provisions of Section 4.176 shall apply in the Village zone:

             1.      Streets in the Village zone shall be developed with street trees as described in the
                    Community Elements Book.

                                                        CD4:139
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.12)  MasterSignageandWayfinding:

      A.     AllsignageandwayfindingelementswithintheVillageZoneshallbeincompliancewiththe
             adopted Signage and wayfinding Master Plan for the appropriate SAP.
      B.      Provisions of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11 shall apply in the Village Zone except
             Sections4.156.07and4.156.08.Portionsof Section4.156.08pertainingtoTownCentermay
             be used for comparison purposes to assess conceptually whether signage is allowed in an
             equitablemannerthroughouttheCity.Sections4.156.01through4.156.11arenottobeused
             for direct comparison of sign standards.

      C.     The Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan is the Master Sign Plan for the applicable SAP.

      D.     In the event of  conflict between the applicable standards of  Sections 4.156.01 through
             4.156.11 and this subsection or the applicable Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan, this
             subsection and the Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan shall take precedence.

      E.     The following signs may be permitted in the Village Zone, subject to the conditions in this
             Section.
             1.     SiteSigns:
                    a.      Signs that capture attention establishing a sense of arrival to Villebois and to
                           areas within Villebois.
             2.     SiteDirectional:
                    a.      Permanent mounted signs informing and directing the public to major destina-
                           tions within Villebois.
             3.     RetailSigns:
                    a.      Signswhichidentifytheretailuses,includingbulkheadsigns,bladesigns,tempo-
                           rarywindowsignsandpermanentwindowsignsdesignedtoidentifystorefronts
                           an provide information regarding the retail uses.
             4.     InformationalSigns:
                    a.      Permanent mounted signs located along and adjacent to travel ways providing
                           information to residents and visitors traveling within Villebois.
             5.     FlagsandBanners:
                    a.      Permanentandtemporarypolemountedsignageintendedtoidentifythegraphic
                           identity of  Villebois and to identify seasonal events taking place within the
                           Villebois Community.

      F.      Dimensions and square footage of signs are defined in the Master Signage and Wayfinding
             Plan for the appropriate SAP.

      G.     SignagelocationsarespecifiedintheMasterSignageandWayfindingPlanfortheappropri-
             ate SAP.

      H.     Thenumberof signspermittedisspecifiedintheMasterSignageandwayfindingPlanforthe
             appropriate SAP.

                                                       CD4:140
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

(.13)  DesignPrinciplesApplyingtotheVillageZone:

      A.     Thefollowingdesignprinciplesreflectthefundamentalconcepts,andsupporttheobjectives
             of  the Villebois Village Master Plan, and guide the fundamental qualities of  the built
             environment within the Village zone.
             1.      The design of landscape, streets, public places and buildings shall create a place of
                    distinct character.
             2.      The landscape, streets, public places and buildings within individual development
                    projectsshallbeconsideredrelatedandconnectedcomponentsof theVilleboisVillage
                    Master Plan.
             3.      Thedesignof buildingsshallfunctionallyrelatetoadjacentopenspace,gateways,street
                    orientation, and other features as shown in the Villebois Village Master Plan.
             4.      Thedesignof buildingsandlandscapeshallfunctionallyrelatetosunlight,climate,and
                    topographyinawaythatacknowledgestheseconditionsasparticulartotheWillamette
                    Valley.
             5.      Thedesignof buildingsshallincorporateregionalarchitecturalcharacterandregional
                    building practices.
             6.      The design of buildings shall include architectural diversity and variety in its built
                    form.
             7.      The design of  buildings shall contribute to the vitality of  the street environment
                    through incorporation of storefronts, windows, and entrances facing the sidewalk.

             8.      Thedesignof streetsandpublicspacesshallprovideforandpromotepedestriansafety,
                    connectivity and activity.

             9.      Thedesignof buildingsandlandscapeshallminimizethevisualimpactof,andscreen
                    views of off-street parking from streets.
             10.    Thedesignof exteriorlightingshallminimizeoff-siteimpacts,yetenablefunctionality.

(.14)  DesignStandardsApplyingtotheVillageZone:

      A.     ThefollowingDesignStandardsimplementtheDesignPrinciplesfoundinSection4.125(.13),
             above, and enumerate the architectural details and design requirements applicable to build-
             ingsandotherfeatureswithintheVillage(V)zone.TheDesignStandardsarebasedprimarily
             on the features, types, and details of the residential traditions in the Northwest, but are not
             intended to mandate a particular style or fashion. All development within the Village zone
             shall incorporate the following:.
             1.     GeneralProvisions:
                    a.      Flag lots are not permitted.
                    b.      The minimum lot depth for a single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling
                           unit shall be 70 feet.
                    c.      Village Center lots may have multiple front lot lines.

                                                       CD4:141
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    d.      For Village Center lots facing two or more streets, two of the facades shall be
                           subject to the minimum building frontage width requirement. Where multiple
                           buildings are located on one lot, the facades of all buildings shall be used to
                           calculate the Minimum Building Frontage Width.
                    e.      NeighborhoodCentersshallonlybelocatedwithinaNeighborhoodCommons.

                    f.       Commercial Recreation facilities shall be compatible with surrounding residen-
                           tial uses.
                    g.      ConvenienceStoreswithintheVillagezoneshallnotexceed4,999sq.ft.,andshall
                           provide pedestrian access.

                    h.      SpecialtyGroceryStoreswithintheVillagezoneshallnotbemore19,999square
                           feet in size.
                    i.       A Grocery Store shall not be more than 40,000 square feet in size.

             2.     Buildingandsitedesignshallinclude:

                    a.      Proportions and massing of architectural elements consistent with those estab-
                           lishedinanapprovedArchitecturalPatternBookorVillageCenterArchitectural
                           Standards.
                    b.      Materials, colors and architectural details executed in a manner consistent with
                           the methods included in an approved Architectural Pattern Book, Community
                           Elements Book or approved Village Center Architectural Standards.

                    c.      Protective overhangs or recesses at windows and doors.
                    d.      Raised stoops, terraces or porches at single-family dwellings.
                    e.      Exposed gutters, scuppers, and downspouts, or approved equivalent.

                    f.       Theprotectionof existingsignificanttreesasidentifiedinanapprovedCommu-
                           nity Elements Book.
                    g.      A landscape plan in compliance with Sections 4.125(.07) and (.11), above.

                    h.      Buildingelevationsof blockcomplexesshallnotrepeatanelevationfoundonan
                           adjacent block.
                    i.       Buildingelevationsof detachedbuildingsshallnotrepeatanelevationfoundon
                           buildings on adjacent lots.

                    j.       A porch shall have no more than three walls.
                    k.      A garage shall provide enclosure for the storage of no more than three motor
                           vehicles, as described in the definition of Parking Space, except that a single
                           garage for a quadplex may provide enclosure for up to four motor vehicles.

             3.      Lighting and site furnishings shall be in compliance with the approved Architectural
                    Pattern Book, Community Elements Book, or approved Village Center Architectural
                    Standards.

                                                        CD4:142
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       § 4.125

                                                                                                 4.      Buildingsystems,asnotedinTablesV-3andV-4(PermittedMaterialsandConfigura-
                                                                                                                                                    tions),below,shallcomplywiththematerials,applicationsandconfigurationsrequired
                                                                                                                                                    therein.Designcreativityisencouraged.TheLEEDBuildingCertificationProgramof
                                                                                                                                                    the U.S. Green Building Council may be used as a guide in this regard.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Table V-3: PermittedMaterials and Configurations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AllSingleFamilyDetached,MiddleHousing—anylocation
                                                                                                                                                      AllMixed-Use,Multi-Family,andCommercialBuildings—outsidetheVillageCenter*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Configuration and Application
                                                                                                                         PermittedMaterials
Exterior
Surfaces of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        insidecorner of two vertical planes
Building
Wallsand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mum of 16" on sidewall
Chimneys

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   weather

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ternately

                                                                                                                                           stone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   bond)

Building
Elements                                                                                                                                   sonry, brick,cast concrete, stucco, wood,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               not - shallbe visibly supported by columns, beams, or
                                                                                                                                           built-up fiber-cement board, fiberglass,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                brackets
                                                                                                                                           iron, or tubularsteel

                                                                                                                                           brick,cast concrete, or stucco

                                                                                                                                           shallbe of wood, wood polymer, stucco,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to the ground
                                                                                                                                           concrete, brick,or stone

                                                                                                                                           welded steel, pre-cast concrete, stone, wood                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wall or fencing material
                                                                                                                                           or wood polymer

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ings

                                                                                                                                           materials, and wood pickets, lattice, boards,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of 8" thick
                                                                                                                                           or openpaintedmetal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   walls

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vertical

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   but not at corners

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   functional element

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   furthermost adjacent building face

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CD4:143

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Fence boards must be stained or painted

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Balconiesshallextendno more than 36 inches beyond the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Ornamentationis only allowed to highlight or embellish a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Fence heights may stepup or downin one ft. increments

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Metal fencing shallbe of open nature and predominately

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Stucco landscape walls shallbe over concreteor block

                                                                                                                         %    Wallsand fencesmay be of permitted wall                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %    Concreteandmasonrylandscape walls shall be a minimum

                                                                                                                         %    Trellises shallbe iron, welded steel, or wood                                                                                                                                                                                                         %    Landscape walls andfencesshall match materials on build-

                                                                                                                         %    Railings and balustrades shallbe iron,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %    Thearea under porches and decks shall be screened with

                                                                                                                         %    Porches, balconies, decks, stoops, andstairs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %    Masonry shallbe terminated on a concretebase or carried

                                                                                                                         %    Arches and piers shallbe stonemasonry,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %    Columns andpostsshallbe minimum 5" in section

                                                                                                                         %    Postsand columnsshallbe of stonema-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %    All balconies, decks, andtrellises - whether cantilevered or

                                                                                                                         %    Plywood with battens(notprimary façade)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %    Cast concretewalls shallhave a textured finish

                                                                                                                         %    Pre-cast concretetrim andveneer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %    Concreteblock shallbe split-faced or scored

                                                                                                                         %    Exposed cast-in-place concrete                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %    Stucco shallbe smooth sand finish

                                                                                                                         %    Masonry: brick,stone, concrete, andfaux-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %    Brick shallbe laid in a truebonding pattern (no stack

                                                                                                                         %    Stucco, cementitious                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %    Board andbatten shallnot exceed 10", and 2" running al-

                                                                                                                         %    Fiber-cement sidingandshingles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    Lap-siding shallnot exceed 7" and drop-siding 10" to the

                                                                                                                         %    Dimensionallumberelements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %    Any material used on a front façade shall returna mini-

                                                                                                                         %    Cedar sidingandshingles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %    Materials can only be changed at horizontal linesor at an
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Table V-3: PermittedMaterials and Configurations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AllSingleFamilyDetached,MiddleHousing—anylocation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AllMixed-Use,Multi-Family,andCommercialBuildings—outsidetheVillageCenter*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Configuration and Application
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PermittedMaterials
         Roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Architectural grade composition shingles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Principal sloped roofs shallhave symmetrical 4:12 to 12:12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pitches

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             wall andfinished by a molding or stucco detail

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             up to 6.9:12 pitch.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             offs instead of bending around trim boards or otherele-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ments.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ment, solar equipment, antennas, satellites, etc., shall be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             screened from view.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or (1) copper, brass or aluminum chain,(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      freefall,shallconvey waterto a no-splash basin. The basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rope, or (3) freefall water, in lieu of metal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   anddrainage conveyance away from the basinrequire City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             downspouts.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     approval on a per design basis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             areas

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ing walls

         Windows &
         Doors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               steel frames andsashes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tion

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             public areas                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    exterior wall surface or surrounded by trim

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             glass, or embossedmetal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dow

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             screened from public areas

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             shutters

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CD4:144

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wood, fiber-cement,vinyl, or fiberglass

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sliding glassdoors are allowed only where

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Entryand garage doors of wood, fiber-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Door andwindowshutters shall be sized to cover the win-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Clear or Low-E glasswhere visible from                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Windows anddoors shallbe recessedat least 3" from the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Wood, metal or vinyl-clad wood, vinyl or                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Individualwindows shallbe square or vertical in propor-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Flat roofs shallbe enclosedby parapets

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dormers shallbe placed at least 36 inches from sidebuild-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fabric,steel, or glassawnings                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Roof ventsshallbe minimized where visible from public

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Metal or wood gutters. Metal downspouts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Chain or ropedownspouts anchored at bottom, or gutter

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Eco/Green roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 All roof-mounted components, such as mechanical equip-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Standingseam metal, parallel to slope                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Metal Downspoutsshallbe round or box and use stand-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Built-up flat roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gutters shallhave a half-round, ogee, or square profile

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Slate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fasciagutters are not allowed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Concreteor clay tiles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Eco/Green roofs are permitted on flat roofs or sloped roofs

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cedar shingles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eaves shalloverhang at least 12 inches or be tight to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             § 4.125

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Table V-4: PermittedMaterials and Configurations:
CommercialBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*   EducationalFacilities(Schools)—Anylocation
Multi-FamilyBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*   ReligiousInstitutions—Anylocation
Mixed-UseBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Configuration and Application
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PermittedMaterials
Exterior
Surfaces of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sidecorner of two vertical planes
Building
Walls                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   weather

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ternately

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        bond)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          masonryunits andfaux-stone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    scored

Building
Elements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sonry, brick,cast concrete, stucco, wood,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     furthermost adjacent building face
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          built-up fiber-cement board, fiberglass, or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          welded steel

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          brick,cast concrete, or stucco                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                to the ground

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          shallbe of wood, stucco, concrete, brick,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          stone, or welded steel

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          welded steel, or wood                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         wall or fencing material

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of 8" thick

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          terials, and wood pickets, lattice, boards, or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          openpaintedmetal
Roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Architectural grade composition shingles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Principal sloped roofs shallhave 4:12 to 12:12 pitches (ex-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cludingmansard roofs)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cealedby fascia

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        up to 6.9:12 pitch.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        stead of bending around trim boards or otherelements

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        freefall,shallconvey waterto a no-splash basin. The basin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        anddrainage conveyance away from the basinrequire City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        approval on a per design basis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          or (1) copper, brass or aluminum chain,(2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ment, solar equipment, antennas, satellites, etc., shall be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rope, or (3) freefall water, in lieu of metal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 screened from public streets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          downspouts.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ing walls

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        horizontally a min.of 36 inches as an eave

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CD4:145

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Flat roofs shallbe enclosedby parapetsor shall project

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fabric,steel, or glassawnings                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dormers shallbe placed at least 36 inches from sidebuild-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Metal or wood gutters. Metal downspouts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     All roof-mounted components, such as mechanical equip-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Eco/Green roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chain or ropedownspouts anchored at bottom, or gutter

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Metal gutters anddownspouts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downspoutsshallbe round or box and use standoffs in-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Standingseam metal, parallel to slope                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Gutters shallhave a half-round, ogee, or square profile

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Built-up flat roofs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fasciagutters are not allowed

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Slate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Eco/Green roofs are permitted on flat roofs or sloped roofs

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Concreteor clay tiles                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Where eaves are used, rafter ends may be exposed or con-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wallsand fencesmay be of permitted ma-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Trellises shallbe iron, welded steel, or wood                                                                                                                                                                                                             Concreteandmasonrylandscape walls shall be a minimum

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Railings and balustrades shallbe iron,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thearea under porches and decks shall be screened with

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Porches, balconies, decks, stoops, andstairs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Columns andpostsshallbe minimum 5" in section

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Arches and piers shallbe stonemasonry,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Masonry shallbe terminated on a concretebase or carried

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Postsand columnsshallbe of stone, ma-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Balconiesshallextendno more than 36 inches beyond the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Plywood w/ battens(notprimary façade)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pre-cast concretetrim andveneer

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exposed cast-in-place concrete

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Masonry: brick,stone, concrete, concrete                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Concreteblock shallbe split-faced,ground-faced, or

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Stucco, cementitious                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Brick shallbe laid in a truebonding pattern (no stack

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fiber-cement siding                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Board andbatten shallnot exceed 10", and 2" running al-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cedar sidingandwood elements                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lap-siding shallnot exceed 7" and drop-siding 10" to the

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Metal Panel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Materials may be changed at horizontal linesor at an in-
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                        Table V-4: PermittedMaterials and Configurations:
CommercialBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*   EducationalFacilities(Schools)—Anylocation
Multi-FamilyBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*   ReligiousInstitutions—Anylocation
Mixed-UseBuildings—InsidetheVillageCenter*
                                                                                     Configuration and Application
                  PermittedMaterials
Windows &
Doors                steel frames andsashes                            tion
                                                                       Hexagonalwindows are not allowed

                     public areas                                      exterior wall surface or surrounded by trim

                     glass, or embossedmetal

                     shutters

*Note: See Figure 2 of the Villebois Village Master Plan for boundariesof Village Center

(.15)  VillageCenterDesignPrinciples:

       A.     In addition to the design principles found in Section 4.125(.13), above, the following
               principles reflect the fundamental concepts, support the objectives of the Villebois Village
               Master Plan, and guide the fundamental qualities within the Village Center:

               1.      The buildings, streets and open spaces of the Village Center are intended to relate in
                      such a way as to create an identifiable and related series of public and private spaces.

(.16)  VillageCenterDesignStandards:

       A.     InadditiontothedesignstandardsfoundinSection4.125(.14),above,thefollowingDesign
               StandardsareapplicabletotheVillageCenter,exclusiveof single-familydetacheddwellings
               and middle housing:

               1.      Off-street parking areas shall not be located between buildings and the street.

               2.      The design of  off-street parking areas shall include pedestrian connections to the
                      buildings they serve, sidewalks, and adjacent parking areas.

               3.      The design of buildings and public spaces shall include interior (through-buildings)
                      andexteriorpublicpedestrianaccessways,asrequired,tofacilitatepedestrianconnec-
                      tions.

               4.      The design of buildings shall include rear and side entrances in addition to primary
                      street front entrances when necessary to facilitate pedestrian connections.

               5.      Building facades shall be broken into multiple vertical elements.

               6.      CanopiesandawningsshouldbeprovidedasspecifiedintheVillageCenterArchitec-
                      tural Standards.

               7.      The design of buildings and landscapes shall provide opportunities for public art at a
                      minimum of one location per block.

                                                             CD4:146

                      Wood, fiber-cement,vinyl, or fiberglass

                      Entryand garage doors of wood, fiber-            Shutters shallbe sized to cover the windowor door

                      Clear or Low-E glasswhere visible from           Windows anddoors shallbe recessedat least 3" from the

                      Wood, metal or vinyl-clad wood, vinyl or         Individualwindows shallbe square or vertical in propor-
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.125

(.17)  VillageCenterPlazaDesignStandards:
      A.     InadditiontothedesignstandardsfoundinSection4.125(.16),above,thefollowingDesign
             Standards are specific to the design of the Village Center Plaza:
             1.      The Village Center Plaza shall be measured as all space enclosed by the surrounding
                   buildings.
             2.      TheVillageCenterPlazalandscapeshallconsistof texturedpavingdifferentiatedfrom
                   typicalstreetpavement.Vehicularmovementandon-streetparkingwithintheVillage
                   Center Plaza is encouraged to have similar paving treatments and occur at the same
                   elevation as the sidewalk and the Village Center Plaza.
             3.      The Village Center Plaza shall include the following:
                   a.      Incorporation of existing significant trees, street furniture, bollards or similar
                          elements, and exterior lighting.
                   b.      One vertical tower element facing the Village Center Plaza with proportions,
                          massing,andarchitecturalelementsconsistentwiththeVillageCenterArchitec-
                          tural Standards.
(.18)  Village Zone Development Permit Process. Except as noted below, the provision of  Sections
      4.140(.02) through (.06) shall apply to development in the Village zone.
      A.    Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this subsection to describe the process by which
             development plans are proposed, reviewed and adopted and to provide the procedures and
             criteria for development permit application, review and approval.
      B.    Unique Features and Processes of the Village (V) Zone. To be developed, there are three
             phases of  project approval. Some of  these phases may be combined, but generally the
             approvals move from the conceptual stage through to detailed architectural, landscape and
             site plan review in stages. All development within the Village zone shall be subject to the
             following processes:
             1.      Specific Area Plan (SAP) approval by the Development Review Board, as set forth in
                   Sections4.125(.18)(C)through(F),below(StageIequivalent).Tobedeveloped,asite
                   must be included in an approved SAP.
             2.      PreliminaryDevelopmentPlan(PDP)approvalbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard,as
                   setforthinSections4.125(.18)(G)through(K)(StageIIequivalent),below.Following
                   SAP approval, an applicant may file applications for Preliminary Development Plan
                   approval(StageIIequivalent)foranapprovedphaseinaccordancewiththeapproved
                   SAP, and any conditions attached thereto. Land divisions may also be preliminarily
                   approvedatthisstage.ExceptforlandwithintheCentralSAPormulti-familydwellings
                   outsidetheCentralSAP,applicationforaZoneChangeandFinalDevelopmentPlan
                   (FDP)shallbemadeconcurrentlywithanapplicationforPDPapproval.TheSAPand
                   PDP/FDP may be reviewed simultaneously when a common ownership exists.
                   Final Development Plan (FDP) approval by the Development Review Board or the
                   Planning Director, as set forth in Sections 4.125(.18)(L) through (P) (Site Design
                   Reviewequivalent),below,mayoccurasaseparatephaseforlandsintheCentralSAP
                   or multi-family dwellings outside the Central SAP.

                                                      CD4:147
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Administrative Review approvals, by the Planning Director, as set forth in Section
                   4.030. Prior to commencement of development, final approval for land divisions, tree
                   removal permits, grading permits, and compliance with prior approvals must be
                   received. Development permit issuance follows completion of the foregoing stages.

      C.    SpecificAreaPlan(SAP)ApplicationProcedures:

             1.      Purpose—A SAP is intended to advance the design of the Villebois Village Master
                   Plan.

             2.      If not initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission or Development Review
                   Board,anapplicationforSAPapprovalshallbesubmittedbytheMasterPlanner,orby
                   landownerspursuanttosubsectionC.3below.Theapplicationshallbeaccompaniedby
                   payment of a fee established in accordance with the City's fee schedule.

             3.      The owners of property representing at least 80 percent of a SAP area may request in
                   writing that the Master Planner submit a SAP application. The Master Planner must
                   provideawrittenresponsewithinthirtydays.If theMasterPlanneragreestosubmita
                   request, the Master Planner shall have 180 days to submit the SAP application. If the
                   Master Planner denies the request, fails to respond within 30 days, or fails as deter-
                   mined by the Planning Director to diligently pursue the application after agreeing to
                   submitit,byprovidingdraftsof apatternbookandallotherSAPelementswithin60
                   daysandthereafterpursuingapprovalingoodfaith,thepropertyownersmaysubmit
                   aSAPapplicationforreviewandapproval.Acopyof aSAPapplicationsubmittedby
                   property owners must be provided to the Master Planner. Once the application has
                   beendeemedcompletebytheCity,theMasterPlannershallhave30daystoreviewand
                   comment in writing before the proposed SAP is scheduled for public hearing by the
                   DRB.

      D.    SAPApplicationSubmittalRequirements:

             1.     Existing Conditions—An application for SAP approval shall specifically and clearly
                   show the following features and information on maps, drawings, application form or
                   attachments.TheSAPshallbedrawnatascaleof 1"=100'(unlessotherwiseindicated)
                   and may include multiple sheets depicting the entire SAP area, as follows:
                   a.      Date, north arrow and scale of drawing.
                   b.      Theboundariesof theSpecificAreaPlanasmayberefinedandinkeepingwith
                          theintentof theVilleboisVillageMasterPlan'sconceptuallocationof SAPs.(See
                          Figure 3 "Conceptual Specific Area Plan Boundaries" of the Villebois Village
                          Master Plan.)
                   c.      A vicinity map showing the location of the SAP sufficient to define its location
                          andboundariesandClackamasCountyTaxAssessor'smapnumbersof thetract
                          boundaries. The vicinity map shall clearly identify the nearest cross streets.
                   d.      Anaerialphotograph(at1"=500')of theproposedsiteandpropertieswithin50
                          feet of the SAP boundary.

                                                      CD4:148
                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.125

      e.      Thesize,dimensions,andzoningof eachlotorparceltaxlotandTaxAssessor's
             mapdesignationsfortheSAPandpropertieswithin50feetof theSAPboundary.
      f.       The location, dimensions and names, as appropriate, of  existing and platted
             streetsandalleysonandwithin50feetof theperimeterof theSAP,togetherwith
             the location of  existing and planned easements, sidewalks, bike routes and
             bikeways,trailsandthelocationof otherimportantfeaturessuchassectionlines,
             section corners, and City boundary lines. The plan shall also identify all trees 6
             inches and greater d.b.h. on the project site only in that SAP.
      g.      Contour lines shall relate to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 and be at
             minimum intervals as follows:
             i.       One foot contours for slopes of up to five percent;
             ii.      Two foot contours for slopes of from six percent to 12 percent;
             iii.     Fivefootcontoursforslopesof from12percentto20percent.Theseslopes
                    shall be clearly identified, and
             iv.     Ten foot contours for slopes exceeding 20 percent.
      h.      The location of areas designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SROZ),
             and associated 25-foot Impact Areas, within the SAP and within 50 feet of the
             SAP boundary, as required by Section 4.139.

2.     SAP Development Information—The following information shall also be shown at a
      scale of 1" = 100' and may include multiple sheets depicting the entire SAP area:
      a.      Asitecirculationplanshowingtheapproximatelocationof proposedvehicular,
             bicycle and pedestrian access points and circulation patterns, and parking and
             loading areas.
      b.      Theapproximatelocationof allproposedstreets,alleys,otherpublicways,curb
             extensions, sidewalks, bicycle and pedestrian accessways, neighborhood com-
             mons, and easements. The map shall identify existing subdivisions and develop-
             ment and un-subdivided land ownerships adjacent to the proposed SAP site.
      c.      Theapproximateprojectlocation,acreage,type,preliminarylotlinesanddensity
             of theproposeddevelopment.Fortheresidentialportionsof theSAP,themaster
             plannershallidentify:1)theoverallminimumandmaximumnumberof housing
             units to be provided; and 2) the overall minimum and maximum number of
             housing units to be provided, by housing type.
      d.      Theapproximatelocationsof proposedparks,playgroundsorotheroutdoorplay
             areas,outdoorcommonareas,usableopenspaces,andnaturalresourceareasor
             featuresproposedforpreservation.Thisinformationshallincludeidentification
             of areasproposedtobededicatedorotherwisepreservedforpublicuseandthose
             open areas to be maintained and controlled by the owners of the property and
             their successors in interest for private use. This information shall be provided in
             tabularform,andshallreconcileallsuchareasasmayhavebeenadjustedthrough
             prior approvals.

                                         CD4:149
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    e.      Acompositeutilityplanillustratingexistingandproposedwater,sanitarysewer,
                           and storm drainage facilities necessary to serve the SAP.
                    f.       A grading plan illustrating existing and proposed contours as prescribed previ-
                           ously in this section.
                    g.      A development sequencing plan.
                    h.      A utilities sequencing plan.
                    i.       A bicycle and pedestrian circulation plan.
                    j.       A tree removal, preservation and protection plan.
                    k.      A property ownership list, as required by Section 4.035(.04)(A)(6)(j).
                    l.       Attheapplicant'sexpense,theCityshallhaveaTrafficImpactAnalysisprepared,
                           as required by Section 4.030(.02)(B), to review the anticipated traffic impacts of
                           the proposed development. This traffic report shall include an analysis of the
                           impact of the SAP on the local street and road network, and shall specify the
                           maximum projected average daily trips and maximum parking demand associ-
                           atedwithbuildoutof theentireSAP,anditshallmeetSubsection4.140(.09)(J)(2).
                    m.     A master signage and wayfinding plan.
                    n.      A rainwater management program.
             3.     ArchitecturalPatternBook—AnArchitecturalPatternBookshallbesubmittedwitha
                    SAP application. The Architectural Pattern Book shall apply to all development
                    outsideof theVillageCenterBoundary,asshownonFigure1of thecurrentlyadopted
                    VilleboisVillageMasterPlan.AnArchitecturalPatternBookshalladdressthefollow-
                    ing:
                    a.      IllustrateareaswithintheSpecificAreaPlancoveredbytheArchitecturalPattern
                           Book.
                    b.      Anexplanationof howtheArchitecturalPatternBookisorganized,andhowitis
                           to be used.
                    c.      Define specific standards for architecture, color, texture, materials, and other
                           design elements.
                    d.      Include a measurement or checklist system to facilitate review of development
                           conformity with the Architectural Pattern Book.
                    e.      Include the following information for all middle housing, and single-family
                           detached housing inside and outside of the Village Center, and for all other
                           buildingsoutsideof theVillageCenter,includingNeighborhoodCenter(s)within
                           the SAP:
                           i.       Illustrate and describe the Regional and Climatic conditions affecting the
                                  SAP, and the proposed building types including:
                                  •        Relationship of indoor and outdoor spaces.
                                  •        Design for rainwater paths including roof forms, gutters, scuppers
                                         and downspouts.

                                                        CD4:150
                    PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.125

                     •        Design for natural day-lighting.
                     •        Massing and materials.
       f.       Illustrateanddescribeexamplesof appropriatearchitecturalstylesandhowthey
              would be applied to specific land use types, including the definitions (i.e., speci-
              fications)of theelements,massing,andfacadecompositionforeachstyleinclud-
              ing:
              i.       Architectural precedent and/or historic relevance of each style.
              ii.      Massing, proportions, and roof forms, including details.
              iii.     Doors, windows and entrances showing trim types and details.
              iv.     Porches, chimneys and unique features and details.
              v.      Materials, colors, light fixtures and accents.
              vi.     Downspouts and gutters.
       g.      Illustrate and describe examples of appropriate exterior lighting types, and how
              their design:
              i.       Minimizes glare.
              ii.      Minimizesemissionof lightbeyondtheboundariesof adevelopmentsite.
              iii.     Conserves energy.
              iv.     Maintains nighttime safety, utility, security, and productivity.
              v.      Minimizes the unnatural brightening of the night sky.
       h.      A Master Fencing Program illustrating and describing the specifications and
              materials for fencing within the SAP.
4.     CommunityElementsBook—ACommunityElementsBookshallbesubmitted,includ-
       ing the following:
       a.      Lighting Master Plan and Specifications, which address the requirements of
              Section 4.125(.18)(D)(3)(g), above.
       b.      Lighting Master Plan and Specifications.
       c.      Site Furnishings Master Plan and Specifications.
       d.      Curb Extensions Master Plan and Specifications.
       e.      Street Tree Master Plan and Specifications.
       f.       Post Box Specifications.
       g.      Bollard Specifications.
       h.      Trash Receptacle Specifications.
       i.       Recycling Receptacle Specifications.
       j.       Bench Specifications.
       k.      Bicycle Rack and Locker Specifications.
       l.       Playground Equipment Specifications.
       m.     Master Plant List and Specifications.

                                            CD4:151
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    n.      For SAP Central, provide additional information regarding the elements within
                           the Address Overlay Areas.
             5.     RainwaterManagementProgram—A Rainwater Management Program shall be sub-
                    mitted, addressing the following:
                    a.      Provisionforopportunitiestointegratewaterquality,detention,andinfiltration
                           into the SAP's natural features and proposed development areas;
                    b.      Provisionof methodsreducingtheincreaseinrunoff fromthe90thpercentileof
                           all rain events and meet pre-development hydrology to the greatest extent prac-
                           ticable;
                    c.      Identification of guidelines and standards for the design of all Rainwater Man-
                           agement Systems within the SAP, that:
                           i.       Manage the ¼­inch, 24-hour rainfall event at pre-development levels.
                           ii.      Mitigate 100 percent of impervious area from private areas within public
                                  areas and/or private areas (i.e., parks and open space areas, public street
                                  rights-of-way).
                           iii.     Mitigate100percentof imperviousareafromallpublicareaswithinpublic
                                  areas (i.e., parks and open space areas, public street rights-of-way).
                           iv.     Remove 70 percent of Total Suspended Solids (TSS) for ¼­inch, 24-hour
                                  storm event for all development areas.
                           v.      Remove65percentof Phosphorousfor¼­inch,24-hourstormeventforall
                                  development areas.
                           vi.     Integrate compost-amended topsoil in all areas to be landscaped to help
                                  detain runoff, reduce irrigation and fertilizer needs, and create a sustain-
                                  able, low-maintenance landscape.
                           vii.    Treatmentassociatedwithstormwaterrunoff willbeconsideredinmeeting
                                  Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and Phosphorus removal requirements.
             6.     Master Signage and Wayfinding—A Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan shall be
                    submitted with an SAP application and shall address the following:
                    a.      Illustratetheboundariesof theSAPcoveredbytheMasterSignageandWayfind-
                           ing Plan.
                    b.      Anexplanationof howtheMasterSignageandWayfindingPlanisorganizedand
                           how it is to be used.
                    c.      Definespecificstandardsforsignageandwayfindingelementswithinthesubject
                           SAP.
                    d.      Define specifications for logo, typography, symbols and color palette.
                    e.      Narrative shall be submitted as part of  the application to adopt the Master
                           Signage and Wayfinding Plan showing how the proposed Master Signage and
                           WayfindingPlanmeetsthePurposestatementof W.C.Section4.156.01andhow
                           the proposed Plan is consistent with site signs, sited directional signs and infor-
                           mationsignsinotherVilleboisSAPs.Narrativeshallalsobeprovideddescribing

                                                        CD4:152
                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

             how the proposed Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan compares conceptually
             withthesignageallowedintheWilsonvilleTownCenter,asdescribedinSection
             4.156.08, to ensure that signage is allowed in a[n] equitable manner throughout
             the City. Section 4.156.08 is not to be used for a direct comparison of  sign
             standards.

7.     VillageCenterArchitecturalStandards—Village Center Architectural Standards shall
      besubmittedwithanapplicationfortheCentralSAP.TheVillageCenterArchitectural
      Standardsshallapplytotheportionof SAPCentralwithintheVillageCenterbound-
      ary.ThisareaisshownonFigure1of thecurrentlyadoptedMasterPlan.TheVillage
      Center Architectural Standards shall address the following:
      a.      Provide an explanation of how the Village Center Architectural Standards is
             organized, and how it is to be used.
      b.      Include a measurement or checklist system to facilitate review of development
             conformity with the Village Center Architectural Standards.
      c.      The Village Center Architectural Standards shall address Village Center Design
             Standards required by Sections 4.125(.16) and (.17), above.
      d.      Illustrate the boundaries of all Address Overlay Areas.
      e.      ForeachAddressOverlayArea,theVillageCenterArchitecturalStandardsshall
             include a narrative describing the intended characteristics.
      f.       TheVillageCenterArchitecturalStandardsshallincludestandardsforallbuild-
             ings regarding the following elements:
             i.       Building massing and proportions.
             ii.      Roof forms, including typical components.
             iii.     Building components, including but not limited to:
                    •        Doors and primary entrances.
                    •        Canopies and awnings.
                    •        Windows.
                    •        Porches, balconies, bay windows.
             iv.     Exterior materials and color palette
      g.      The Village Center Architectural Standards shall work in coordination with the
             following SAP documents:
             i.       The Parks and Open Space Plan.
             ii.      The Site Circulation Plan.
             iii.     Composite Utility Plan.
             iv.     The Master Signage and Wayfinding Plan.
             v.      The Community Elements Book.
             vi.     The Rainwater Management Program.

                                          CD4:153
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             8.     SAP Narrative Statement—A narrative statement shall be submitted, addressing the
                    following:
                    a.      A description, approximate location and timing of  each proposed phase of
                           development within the SAP.
                    b.      An explanation of how the proposed development complies with the applicable
                           standards of this section.
                    c.      A statement describing the impacts of the proposed development on natural
                           resourceswithintheSAPandhowtheproposeddevelopmentcomplieswiththe
                           applicable requirements of Chapter 4.
                    d.      Includesadescriptionof thegoalsandobjectivesof theVilleboisVillageMaster
                           Plan and the Design Principles of the V-Zone, and how they will be met for the
                           specified land use area.
                    e.      IncludesinformationdemonstratinghowtheArchitecturalPatternBooksatisfies
                           thegoalsandconceptsof theVilleboisVillageMasterPlan,theDesignPrinciples
                           and Design Standards of the Village zone.
                    f.       Where applicable, a written description of the proposal's conformance with the
                           Village Center Design Principles and Standards.

      E.    SAPApprovalProcessandReviewCriteria:

             1.      An application for SAP approval shall be reviewed using the following procedures:
                    a.      Notice of a public hearing before the Development Review Board regarding a
                           proposed SAP shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in
                           Section 4.012.
                    b.      The Development Review Board may approve an application for SAP approval
                           only upon finding the following approval criteria are met:
                           i.       That the proposed SAP:
                                  •        Is consistent with the standards identified in this section.
                                  •        Complies with the applicable standards of the Planning and Land
                                        Development Ordinance, and
                                  •        Is consistent with the Villebois Village Master Plan. Those elements
                                        of theVillageMasterPlanwithwhichtheSAPmustbeconsistentare
                                        thePlan'sGoals,Policies,andImplementationMeasures,and,except
                                        as the text otherwise provides, Figures 1, 5, 6A, 7, 8, 9A, and 9B.
                           ii.      If the SAP is to be phased, as enabled by Sections 4.125(.18)(D)(2)(g) and
                                  (h), that the phasing sequence is reasonable.
                           iii.     TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmayrequiremodificationstotheSAP,or
                                  otherwise impose such conditions, as it may deem necessary to ensure
                                  conformance with the Villebois Village Master Plan, and compliance with
                                  applicablerequirementsandstandardsof thePlanningandLandDevelop-
                                  ment Ordinance, and the standards of this section.

                                                       CD4:154
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

F.     RefinementstoApprovedVilleboisVillageMasterPlan:
      1.      In the process of reviewing a SAP for consistency with the Villebois Village Master
             Plan,theDevelopmentReviewBoardmayapproverefinements,butnotamendments,
             totheMasterPlan.RefinementstotheVilleboisVillageMasterPlanmaybeapproved
             by the Development Review Board, upon the applicant's detailed graphic demonstra-
             tion of  compliance with the criteria set forth in Section 4.125(.18)(F)(2), below.
             Amendments to the Villebois Village Master Plan may be approved by the Planning
             Commission as set forth in Section 4.032(.01)(B).
             a.      Refinements to the Master Plan are defined as:
                    i.       Changestothestreetnetworkorfunctionalclassificationof streetsthatdo
                           not significantly reduce circulation system function or connectivity for
                           vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
                    ii.      Changestothenatureorlocationof parktype,trails,oropenspacethatdo
                           not significantly reduce function, usability, connectivity, or overall distri-
                           bution or availability of these uses in the Specific Area Plan.
                    iii.     Changes to the nature or location of utilities or storm water facilities that
                           do not significantly reduce the service or function of the utility or facility.
                    iv.     Changes to the location or mix of land uses that do not significantly alter
                           the overall distribution or availability of  uses in the affected SAP. For
                           purposesof thissubsection,"landuses"or"uses"aredefinedintheaggre-
                           gate, with specialty condos, mixed use condos, urban apartments, condos,
                           village apartments, neighborhood apartments, row houses and small de-
                           tached uses comprising a land use group and medium detached, standard
                           detached, large and estate uses comprising another.
                    v.      Achangeindensitythatdoesnotexceedtenpercent,providedsuchdensity
                           change does not result in fewer than 2,300 dwelling units in the Village.
                    vi.     Changes that are significant under the above definitions, but necessary to
                           protect an important community resource or substantially improve the
                           function of collector or minor arterial streets.
             b.      As used herein, "significant" means:
                    i.       More than ten percent of any quantifiable matter, requirement, or perfor-
                           mance measure, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(F)(1)(a), above, or,
                    ii.      That which negatively affects an important, qualitative feature of  the
                           subject, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(F)(1)(a), above.

      2.      Refinements meeting the above definition may be approved by the DRB upon the
             demonstration and finding that:
             a.      TherefinementswillequallyorbettermeettheGoals,PoliciesandImplementa-
                    tion Measures of the Villebois Village Master Plan.
             b.      The refinement will not result in significant detrimental impacts to the environ-
                    ment or natural or scenic resources of the SAP and Village area, and

                                                 CD4:155
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    c.      The refinement will not preclude an adjoining or subsequent SAP area from
                          development consistent with the Master Plan.

             3.      Amendmentsaredefinedaschangestoelementsof theMasterPlannotconstitutinga
                    refinement. Amendments to the Master Plan must follow the same procedures appli-
                    cable to adoption of the Master Plan itself.

      G.    PreliminaryDevelopmentPlanApprovalProcess(EquivalenttoStageII):

             1.      Anapplicationforapprovalof aPreliminaryDevelopmentPlanforadevelopmentin
                    an approved SAP shall:
                    a.      BefiledwiththeCityPlanningDivisionfortheentireSAP,orwhensubmissionof
                          theSAPinphaseshasbeenauthorizedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard,fora
                          phase in the approved sequence.
                    b.      Be made by the owner of all affected property or the owner's authorized agent;
                          and
                    c.      Be filed on a form prescribed by the City Planning Division and filed with said
                          division and accompanied by such fee as the City Council may prescribe by
                          resolution; and
                    d.      Set forth the professional coordinator and professional design team for the
                          project; and
                    e.      Statewhetherthedevelopmentwillincludemixedlanduses,andif so,whatuses
                          and in what proportions and locations.
                    f.       Includeapreliminarylanddivision(concurrently)perSection4.200,asapplica-
                          ble.
                    g.      IncludeaconcurrentapplicationforaZoneMapAmendment(i.e.,ZoneChange)
                          for the subject phase.

             2.      The application for Preliminary Development Plan approval shall include conceptual
                    and quantitatively accurate representations of  the entire development sufficient to
                    demonstrate conformance with the approved SAP and to judge the scope, size and
                    impact of  the development on the community and shall be accompanied by the
                    following information:
                    a.      Aboundarysurveyoracertifiedboundarydescriptionbyasurveyorlicensedin
                          the State of Oregon.
                    b.      Topographic information sufficient to determine direction and percentage of
                          slopes, drainage patterns, and in environmentally sensitive areas, (e.g., flood
                          plain, wetlands, forested areas, steep slopes or adjacent to stream banks). Con-
                          tour lines shall relate to North American Vertical Datum of 1988 and be at
                          minimum intervals as follows:
                          i.       One foot contours for slopes of up to five percent;
                          ii.      Two foot contours for slopes of from six percent to 12 percent;

                                                       CD4:156
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.125

                    iii.     Fivefootcontoursforslopesof from12percentto20percent.Theseslopes
                           shall be clearly identified, and
                    iv.     Ten foot contours for slopes exceeding 20 percent.
             c.      The location of areas designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SROZ),
                    and associated 25-foot Impact Areas, within the PDP and within 50 feet of the
                    PDP boundary, as required by Section 4.139.
             d.      Atabulationof thelandareatobedevotedtovarioususes,andacalculationof
                    the average residential density per net acre.
             e.      The location, dimensions and names, as appropriate, of  existing and platted
                    streetsandalleysonandwithin50feetof theperimeterof theSAP,togetherwith
                    the location of  existing and planned easements, sidewalks, bike routes and
                    bikeways,trails,andthelocationof otherimportantfeaturessuchassectionlines,
                    sectioncorners,andCityboundarylines.Theplanshallalsoidentifyalltreessix
                    inches and greater d.b.h. on the project site only.
             f.       Conceptual drawings, illustrations and building elevations for each of the listed
                    housing products and typical non-residential and mixed-use buildings to be
                    constructedwithinthePreliminaryDevelopmentPlanboundary,asidentifiedin
                    theapprovedSAPandwhererequired,theapprovedVillageCenterArchitectural
                    Standards.
             g.      Acompositeutilityplanillustratingexistingandproposedwater,sanitarysewer,
                    and storm drainage facilities necessary to serve the SAP.
             h.      If  it is proposed that the Preliminary Development Plan will be executed in
                    phases, the sequence thereof shall be provided.
             i.       Acommitmentbytheapplicanttoprovideaperformancebondorotheraccept-
                    able security for the capital improvements required by the project.
             j.       Attheapplicant'sexpense,theCityshallhaveaTrafficImpactAnalysisprepared,
                    as required by Section 4.030(.02)(B), to review the anticipated traffic impacts of
                    the proposed development. This traffic report shall include an analysis of the
                    impact of the SAP on the local street and road network, and shall specify the
                    maximum projected average daily trips and maximum parking demand associ-
                    atedwithbuildoutof theentireSAP,anditshallmeetSubsection4.140(.09)(J)(2).
H.    PDPApplicationSubmittalRequirements:
      1.      The Preliminary Development Plan shall conform with the approved Specific Area
             Plan, and shall include all information required by Sections 4.125(.18)(D)(1) and (2),
             plus the following:
             a.      The location of water, sewerage and drainage facilities;
             b.      Conceptualbuildingandlandscapeplansandelevations,sufficienttoindicatethe
                    general character of the development;
             c.      The general type and location of signs;
             d.      Topographic information as set forth in Section 4.035;

                                                CD4:157
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    e.      A map indicating the types and locations of all proposed uses; and
                    f.       Agradinganderosioncontrolplanillustratingexistingandproposedcontoursas
                          prescribed previously in this section.
             2.      Inadditiontothisinformation,andunlesswaivedbytheCity'sCommunityDevelop-
                    mentDirectorasenabledbySection4.008(.02)(B),attheapplicant'sexpense,theCity
                    shallhaveaTrafficImpactAnalysisprepared,asrequiredbySection4.030(.02)(B),to
                    reviewtheanticipatedtrafficimpactsof theproposeddevelopment.Thistrafficreport
                    shallincludeananalysisof theimpactof thePDPonthelocalstreetandroadnetwork,
                    and shall specify the maximum projected average daily trips and maximum parking
                    demand associated with buildout of  the entire PDP, and it shall meet Subsection
                    4.140(.09)(J)(2) for the full development of all five SAPs.

             3.      The Preliminary Development Plan shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate fully the
                    ultimateoperationandappearanceof thephaseof development.However,approvalof
                    a Final Development Plan is a separate and more detailed review of proposed design
                    features, subject to the standards of Section 4.125(.18)(L) through (P), and Section
                    4.400 through Section 4.450.
             4.      Copiesof legaldocumentsrequiredbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardfordedication
                    or reservation of public facilities, or for the creation of a non-profit homeowner's
                    association, shall also be submitted.

      I.     PDPApprovalProcedures:
             1.      An application for PDP approval shall be reviewed using the following procedures:
                    a.      Notice of a public hearing before the Development Review Board regarding a
                          proposed PDP shall be made in accordance with the procedures contained in
                          Section 4.012.
                    b.      A public hearing shall be held on each such application as provided in Section
                          4.013.
                    c.      Aftersuchhearing,theDevelopmentReviewBoardshalldeterminewhetherthe
                          proposalconformstothepermitcriteriasetforthinthisCode,andshallapprove,
                          conditionally approve, or disapprove the application.

      J.     PDPRefinementstoanApprovedSpecificAreaPlan:
             1.      Intheprocessof reviewingaPDPforconsistencywiththeapprovedSpecificAreaPlan,
                    the DRB may approve refinements, but not amendments, to the SAP. Refinements to
                    the SAP may be approved by the Development Review Board, upon the applicant's
                    detailed graphic demonstration of compliance with the criteria set forth in Section
                    [4.125](.18)(J)(2), below.
                    a.      Refinements to the SAP are defined as:
                          i.       Changestothestreetnetworkorfunctionalclassificationof streetsthatdo
                                 not significantly reduce circulation system function or connectivity for
                                 vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.

                                                       CD4:158
                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

             ii.      Changestothenatureorlocationof parktype,trails,oropenspacethatdo
                    not significantly reduce function, usability, connectivity, or overall distri-
                    bution or availability of these uses in the Preliminary Development Plan.
             iii.     Changes to the nature or location of utilities or storm water facilities that
                    do not significantly reduce the service or function of the utility or facility.
             iv.     Changes to the location or mix of land uses that do not significantly alter
                    the overall distribution or availability of uses in the Preliminary Develop-
                    ment Plan. For purposes of  this subsection, "land uses" or "uses" are
                    defined in the aggregate, with specialty condos, mixed use condos, urban
                    apartments, condos, village apartments, neighborhood apartments, row
                    houses and small detached uses comprising a land use group and medium
                    detached, standard detached, large and estate uses comprising another.
             v.      Achangeindensitythatdoesnotexceedtenpercent,providedsuchdensity
                    change has not already been approved as a refinement to the underlying
                    SAP or PDP, and does not result in fewer than 2,300 dwelling units in the
                    Village.
             vi.     Changes that are significant under the above definitions, but necessary to
                    protect an important community resource or substantially improve the
                    functioning of collector or minor arterial streets.

      b.      As used herein, "significant" means:
             i.       More than ten percent of any quantifiable matter, requirement, or perfor-
                    mance measure, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(J)(1)(a), above, or,
             ii.      That which negatively affects an important, qualitative feature of  the
                    subject, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(J)(1)(a), above.

2.      Refinements meeting the above definition may be approved by the DRB upon the
      demonstration and finding that:

      a.      Therefinementswillequallyorbettermeettheconditionsof theapprovedSAP,
             and the Goals, Policies and Implementation Measures of the Villebois Village
             Master Plan.

      b.      The refinement will not result in significant detrimental impacts to the environ-
             ment or natural or scenic resources of the PDP and Village area, and

      c.      TherefinementwillnotprecludeanadjoiningorsubsequentPDPorSAPareas
             from development consistent with the approved SAP or the Master Plan.

3.      AmendmentstotheSAP,notincludingSAPamendmentsforphasing,mustfollowthe
      sameproceduresapplicabletoadoptionof theSAPitself.Amendmentsaredefinedas
      changes to elements of the SAP not constituting a refinement.

4.      Amendments to the SAP for phasing will be processed as a Class II administrative
      review proposal.

                                          CD4:159
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      K.    PDPApprovalCriteria. The Development Review Board may approve an application for a
             PDP only upon finding that the following approval criteria are met:
             1.      That the proposed PDP:
                   a.      Is consistent with the standards identified in this section.
                   b.      Complieswiththeapplicablestandardsof thePlanningandLandDevelopment
                          Ordinance, including Sections 4.140(.09)(J)(1)—(3).
                   c.      Is consistent with the approved Specific Area Plan in which it is located.
                   d.      IsconsistentwiththeapprovedArchitecturalPatternBookand,whererequired,
                          the approved Village Center Architectural Standards.
             2.      If thePDPistobephased,thatthephasingscheduleisreasonableanddoesnotexceed
                   twoyearsbetweencommencementof developmentof thefirst,andcompletionof the
                   last phase, unless otherwise authorized by the Development Review Board.
             3.      Parks within each PDP or PDP phase shall be constructed prior to occupancy of 50
                   percentof thedwellingunitsinthePDPorPDPphase,unlessweatherorotherspecial
                   circumstancesprohibitcompletion,inwhichcasebondingfortheimprovementsshall
                   be permitted.
             4.      IntheCentralSAP,parksshallbeconstructedwithineachPDPasprovidedabove,and
                   that pro rata portion of the estimated cost of Central SAP parks not within the PDP,
                   calculated on a dwelling unit basis, shall be bonded or otherwise secured to the
                   satisfaction of the City.
             5.      The Development Review Board may require modifications to the PDP, or otherwise
                   impose such conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure conformance with the
                   approved SAP, the Villebois Village Master Plan, and compliance with applicable
                   requirements and standards of the Planning and Land Development Ordinance, and
                   the standards of this section.

      L.    FinalDevelopmentPlanApprovalProcedures(EquivalenttoSiteDesignReview):
             1.      UnlessanextensionhasbeengrantedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardasenabledby
                   Section 4.023, an application for FDP approval on lands within the Central SAP or
                   multi-familydwellingsoutsideof theCentralSAPshallbefiledwithintwoyearsafter
                   the approval of a PDP. All applications for approval of a FDP shall:
                   a.      BefiledwiththeCityPlanningDivisionfortheentireFDP,orwhensubmission
                          of thePDPinphaseshasbeenauthorizedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard,for
                          a phase in the approved sequence.
                   b.      Be made by the owner of all affected property or the owner's authorized agent.
                   c.      Be filed on a form prescribed by the City Planning Division and filed with said
                          division and accompanied by such fee as the City Council may prescribe by
                          resolution.
                   d.      Set forth the professional coordinator and professional design team for the
                          project.

                                                      CD4:160
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.125

M.   FDPApplicationSubmittalRequirements:
      1.      An application for approval of a FDP shall be subject to the provisions of Section
             4.034.

N.    FDPApprovalProcedures:
      1.      Anapplicationforapprovalof aFDPshallbesubjecttotheprovisionsof Section4.421

O.    FDPRefinementstoanApprovedPreliminaryDevelopmentPlan:
      1.      In the process of reviewing a FDP for consistency with the underlying Preliminary
             Development Plan, the DRB may approve refinements, but not amendments, to the
             PDP. Refinements to the PDP may be approved by the Development Review Board,
             upontheapplicant'sdetailedgraphicdemonstrationof compliancewiththecriteriaset
             forth in Section 4.125(.18)(O)(2), below.
             a.      Refinements to the PDP are defined as:
                    i.       Changestothestreetnetworkorfunctionalclassificationof streetsthatdo
                           not significantly reduce circulation system function or connectivity for
                           vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
                    ii.      Changestothenatureorlocationof parktype,trails,oropenspacethatdo
                           not significantly reduce function, usability, connectivity, or overall distri-
                           bution or availability of these uses in the PDP.
                    iii.     Changes to the nature or location of utilities or storm water facilities that
                           do not significantly reduce the service or function of the utility or facility.
                    iv.     Changes to the location or mix of land uses that do not significantly alter
                           the overall distribution or availability of  uses in the affected PDP. For
                           purposesof thissubsection,"landuses"or"uses"aredefinedintheaggre-
                           gate, with specialty condos, mixed use condos, urban apartments, condos,
                           village apartments, neighborhood apartments, row houses and small de-
                           tached uses comprising a land use group and medium detached, standard
                           detached, large and estate uses comprising another.
                    v.      Changes that are significant under the above definitions, but necessary to
                           protect an important community resource or substantially improve the
                           functioning of collector or minor arterial streets.
             b.      As used herein, "significant" means:
                    i.       More than ten percent of any quantifiable matter, requirement, or perfor-
                           mance measure, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(O)(1)(a), above, or,
                    ii.      That which negatively affects an important, qualitative feature of  the
                           subject, as specified in [Section 4.125](.18)(F)(1)(a), above.
      2.      Refinements meeting the above definition may be approved by the DRB upon the
             demonstration and finding that:
             a.      Therefinementswillequallyorbettermeettheapprovedconditionsof approval
                    of the PDP.

                                                 CD4:161
§ 4.125                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    b.      The refinement will not result in significant detrimental impacts to the environ-
                          ment or natural or scenic resources of the PDP, the associated SAP, and
                    c.      The refinement will not preclude adjoining or subsequent PDPs, associated or
                          adjoining SAPs from development consistent with an approved SAP or the
                          Villebois Village Master Plan.

             3.      Amendments to the PDP must follow the same procedures applicable to adoption of
                    the PDP itself. Amendments are defined as changes to elements of  the PDP not
                    constituting a refinement.

      P.     FDPApprovalCriteria:

             1.      An application for approval of a FDP shall be subject to the provisions of Section
                    4.421.

             2.      An application for an FDP shall demonstrate that the proposal conforms to the
                    applicable Architectural Pattern Book, Community Elements Book, Village Center
                    Architectural Standards and any conditions of a previously approved PDP.

(.19)  Expirationof SAP,PDPandFDPApprovals. A SAP approval shall not expire. A PDP or FDP
      approvalshallexpiretwoyearsafteritsapprovaldate,if substantialdevelopmenthasnotoccurred
      on the property prior to that time. Provided, however, that the Development Review Board may
      extend these expiration times for up to three additional periods of not more than one year each.
      Applicantsseekingtimeextensionsshallmaketheirrequestsinwritingatleast30daysinadvance
      of theexpirationdate.Requestsfortimeextensionsshallonlybegranteduponashowingthatthe
      applicant has in good faith attempted to develop or market the property in the preceding year or
      that development can be expected to occur within the next year. For purposes of this section,
      "substantial development" is deemed to have occurred if the subsequently-required development
      approval,buildingpermitorpublicworkspermithasbeensubmittedforthedevelopment,andthe
      development has been diligently pursued, including the completion of all conditions of approval
      established for the permit.

(.20)  AdherencetoApprovedPlanandModificationThereof: The applicant shall agree in writing to be
      bound,forher/himself andher/hissuccessorsininterest,bytheconditionsprescribedforapproval
      of a FDP. The approved FDP and phase development sequence shall control the issuance of all
      buildingpermitsandshallrestrictthenature,locationanddesignof alluses.Minorchangesinan
      approvedFDPmaybeapprovedbythePlanningDirectorif suchchangesareconsistentwiththe
      purposes and general character of  the approved development plan. All other modifications,
      excluding revision of the phase development sequence, shall be processed in the same manner as
      the original application and shall be subject to the same procedural requirements.

(.21)  In the event of  a failure to comply with the approved FDP, or any prescribed condition of
      approval, including failure to comply with the phase development schedule, the Development
      Review Board may, after notice and hearing, revoke a FDP. General economic conditions that
      affect all in a similar manner may be considered as a basis for an extension of a development
      schedule.

                                                      CD4:162
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.125

(.22)  In the Village Zone approved SAPs, PDPs, and FDPs, are considered "approved plans" and are the
       basis of legal conforming status of development consistent with Subsection 4.140(.10)C. SAPs,
       PDPs, and FDPs can become legal non-conforming in the same manner as other planned
       developments in the City as described in Subsection 4.140(.10)C.

(.23)  Redevelopment to Add Middle Housing Units: For lots previously developed with at least one
       residential unit in the Village Zone, the following standards apply for adding additional residential
       units. This includes replacement of  residential structures, adding new residential structures,
       expanding existing residential structures, or adding units within a residential structure without
       expanding the structure.
       A.     Residential Density Calculation:
              1.      Middle housing units other than townhouses shall be exempt from maximum density
                     requirements beyond one unit per lot. The maximum density for townhouses shall be
                     the less of: (1) four times the density permitted for single-family detached dwellings, or
                     (2) 25 dwelling units per net acre.
       B.      Lot and Development Standards: The standards of Table V-1 for single-family dwellings apply
              with the following exceptions:
              1.      The minimum lot size for duplexes and two-unit cluster housing is the same as
                     single-family homes.
              2.      The minimum lot size for triplexes and three-unit cluster housing is 5,000 square feet.
              3.      The minimum lot size for quadplexes, four-unit cluster housing, and cottage clusters is
                     7,000 square feet
              4.      If front, rear, or side setbacks would otherwise exceed ten feet for cottage clusters they
                     shall be reduced to ten feet.
              5.      Cottage clusters are exempt from maximum lot coverage standards.
              6.      Cottage clusters must be developed at a minimum density of four units per acre.

       C.     Compliance with Architectural Pattern Book: Where the size of the residential structure and
              lot is the same as shown for one of the unit types in the Architectural Pattern Book for the
              PDP, all standards for that unit type shall be adhered to. If the residential structure or lot size
              does not match at least one of the unit types in the Architectural Pattern Book, only the
              Architectural Styles, Architectural Patterns (can comply with the unit type of choice but
              must follow variety rules such as rules of adjacency), and Fencing must be complied with.

       D.     Parking: Any parking provided shall be consistent with Table V-2 and other related provi-
              sions of Section 4.125.

(.24)  The Village Zone zoning designation shall not be applied to any land not within the boundaries of
       the Villebois Village Master Plan as of December 31, 2021.
(Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 565, 6-21-2004; Ord. No. 579, 3-7-2005; Ord. No. 587, 5-16-2005; Ord.
No. 595, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 596, 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 595, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. 607, 4-3-2006; Ord. No.
667, 8-17-2009; Ord. No. 677, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 719,
6-17-2013; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:163
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.127.  Residential Neighborhood (RN) Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The Residential Neighborhood (RN) zone applies to lands within Residential Neighbor-
       hood Comprehensive Plan Map designation. The RN zone is a Planned Development zone, subject
       to applicable Planned Development regulations, except as superseded by this section or in legisla-
       tive master plans. The purposes of the RN Zone are to:
       A.     Implement the Residential Neighborhood policies and implementation measures of  the
              Comprehensive Plan.
       B.      Implement legislative master plans for areas within the Residential Neighborhood Compre-
              hensive Plan Map designation.
       C.     Create attractive and connected neighborhoods in Wilsonville.
       D.     Regulate and coordinate development to result in cohesive neighborhoods that include:
              walkable and active streets; a variety of housing appropriate to each neighborhood; con-
              nected paths and open spaces; parks and other non-residential uses that are focal points for
              the community; and, connections to and integration with the larger Wilsonville community.
       E.     Encourage and require quality architectural and community design as defined by the
              Comprehensive Plan and applicable legislative master plans.
       F.      Provide transportation choices, including active transportation options.
       G.     Preserve and enhance natural resources so that they are an asset to the neighborhoods, and
              there is visual and physical access to nature.
       H.     Create housing opportunities for a variety of  households, including housing types that
              implement the Wilsonville Equitable Housing Strategic Plan and housing affordability
              provisions of legislative master plans.

(.02)  Permitted uses:
       A.     Open Space.
       B.      Residential dwelling units with the following limitations:
              1.      Frog Pond West Neighborhood:
              a.      During initial development:
                     i.       a maximum of  two townhouses may be attached, except on corner lots, a
                            maximum of three townhouses may be attached.
                     ii.      triplexes are permitted only on corner lots, and quadplexes are not permitted.
                     iii.     only two-unit cluster housing is permitted except on corner lots where three-unit
                            cluster housing is permitted.
              b.      Multi-family dwelling units are not permitted within the Frog Pond West Neighbor-
                     hood, consistent with the Frog Pond West Master Plan.
              2.      In the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods, the extent and mix of different types
                     of dwelling units is limited and controlled by the variety standards in Subsection (.06)
                     C.—E. and related standards.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:164
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.127

              3.      Multi-family dwelling units are only allowed in the Commercial Main Street Area in the
                     Frog Pond East Neighborhood if contained within a mixed-use development. The
                     Commercial Main Street Area is as described in Subsection (.07) A. 1. and shown in
                     Figure A-7.

       C.     Public or private parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and grounds,
              tennis courts, and similar recreational uses, all of a non-commercial nature, provided that any
              principal building or public swimming pool shall be located not less than 45 feet from any
              other lot.

       D.     For the Commercial Main Street area described in Subsection (.07) A. 1. and shown in Figure
              A-7, the ground floor allows commercial uses listed under 1.—9. below. Drive-through
              commercial uses are prohibited. A minimum of 50 percent of the building frontage along SW
              Brisband Street must be occupied by these uses with the remainder of the frontage allowed to
              be Live-Work Dwelling Units.
              1.      Retail sales and service of retail products, under a footprint of 30,000 square feet per
                     tenant.
              2.      Office, including medical facilities.
              3.      Personal and professional services.

              4.      Child and/or day care.
              5.      Food or Beverage service (e.g., restaurants, cafes, brewpubs, bars).
              6.      Community services and community centers.
              7.      Commercial recreation.
              8.      Religious institutions.

              9.      Business-Integrated Dwelling Units accessory to uses listed 1.—9. above.

(.03)  Permitted accessory uses:

       A.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of  the principal
              permitted uses listed above, and located on the same lot.

       B.      Living quarters without kitchen facilities for persons employed on the premises or for guests.
              Such facilities shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unless approved as
              an accessory dwelling unit or duplex.

       C.     Accessory Dwelling Units, subject to the standards of Section 4.113 (.10).

       D.     Home occupations.

       E.     A private garage or parking area.

       F.      Keeping of not more than two roomers or boarders by a resident household.

       G.     Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be
              removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:165
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       H.     Accessory buildings and uses shall conform to front and side yard setback requirements. If
              the accessory buildings and uses do not exceed 120 square feet or ten feet in height, and they
              are detached and located behind the rear-most line of the main buildings, the side and rear
              yard setbacks may be reduced to three feet.

       I.      Livestock and farm animals, subject to the provisions of Section 4.162.

(.04)  Uses permitted subject to Conditional Use Permit requirements:

       A.     Public and semi-public buildings and/or structures essential to the physical and economic
              welfare of an area, such as fire stations, sub-stations and pump stations.

       B.      Commercial Recreation, including public or private clubs, lodges or meeting halls, golf
              courses, driving ranges, tennis clubs, community centers and similar commercial recreational
              uses. Commercial Recreation will be permitted upon a finding that it is compatible with the
              surrounding residential uses and promotes the creation of an attractive, healthful, efficient
              and stable environment for living, shopping or working. All such uses except golf courses and
              tennis courts shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.124(.04)(D) (Neighborhood
              Commercial Centers).

       C.     Churches; public, private and parochial schools; public libraries and public museums.

       D.     Neighborhood Commercial Centers limited to the provisions of goods and services primarily
              for the convenience of and supported by local residents. Neighborhood Commercial Centers
              are only permitted where designated on an approved legislative master plan.

(.05)  Residential Neighborhood Zone Sub-districts:

       A.     RN Zone sub-districts may be established to provide area-specific regulations that implement
              legislative master plans.

              1.      For the Frog Pond West Neighborhood, the sub-districts are listed in Table 1 of this
                     Code and mapped on Figure 6 of the Frog Pond West Master Plan. The Frog Pond
                     West Master Plan Sub-District Map serves as the official sub-district map for the Frog
                     Pond West Neighborhood.

              2.      The area of the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan is divided into subdistricts
                     described below, as shown for reference in Figure A-5:
                     a. Subdistrict E1. The area south of SW Kahle Road and the BPA Easement, east of
                     SW Stafford Road, and north of an existing east-west property line approximately
                     1,232 feet north of SW Advance Road and 1,315 south of SW Kahle Road.
                     b. Sudistrict E2. The area outside the SROZ south of SW Kahle Road, north of the
                     BPA Easement, and west of a creek intersecting SW Kahle Road approximately 1,580
                     feet east of SW Stafford Road.
                     c. Subdistrict E3. The area outside the SROZ south of SW Kahle Road, north of the
                     BPA Easement, east of Subdistrict E2, and west of and abutting the eastern edge of the
                     Master Plan area.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:166
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.127

                    d. Subdistrict E4. The area south of Subdistrict E1, east of SW Stafford Road, north of
                    SW Advance Road, and west of future 63rd Avenue extension from the intersection of
                    SW Advance Road and SW 63rd Avenue north to Subdistrict 1.

                    e. Subdistrict E5. The area south of Subdistrict E1 and the BPA Easement, east of
                    Subdistrict E4, north of SW Advance Road, and west of future 60th Avenue extension
                    from the intersection of SW Advance Road and SW 60th Avenue north to the BPA
                    Easement.

                    f. Subdistrict E6. The area south of the BPA Easement, east of Subdistrict E5, north of
                    SW Advance Road, and west of and abutting the eastern edge of the Master Plan area.

                    g. Subdistrict S1. The area south of SW Advance Road, east of and abutting the
                    western edge of the Master Plan area, north of the Meridian Creek Middle School
                    property, and west of SW 63rd Avenue.

                    h. Subdistrict S2. The area south of SW Advance Road, east of SW 60th Avenue, and
                    north of an existing property line approximately 956 feet south of SW Advance Road,
                    and west of and abutting the eastern edge of the Master Plan area.

                    i. Subdistrict S3. The area south of Subdistrict S2, east of SW 60th Avenue, north of SW
                    Kruse Road, and west of and abutting the eastern edge of the Master Plan area.

                    j. Subdistrict S4. The area south of the Meridian Creek Middle School property, east of
                    and abutting the western edge of the Master Plan area, north of and abutting the
                    southern edge of the Master Plan area, and west of SW 60th Avenue.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:167
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                        Figure A-5. Frog Pond East and South Land Uses and Subdistrict
                                                      Boundaries
(.06)  Development Allowances:
       A.     The minimum and maximum number of residential lots approved shall be consistent with
              this Code and applicable provisions of an approved legislative master plan.
              1.      For initial development of the Frog Pond West Neighborhood, Table 6A in this Code
                     and Frog Pond West Master Plan Table 1 establish the minimum and maximum number
                     of residential lots for the sub-districts.
              2.      For areas that are a portion of a sub-district in the Frog Pond West Neighborhood, the
                     minimum and maximum number of residential lots are established by determining the
                     proportional gross acreage outside of the SROZ and applying that proportion to the
                     minimums and maximums listed in Table 1. The maximum density of the area may be
                     increased, up to a maximum of ten percent of what would otherwise be permitted,
                     based on an adjustment to an SROZ boundary that is consistent with 4.139.06.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:168
                                       PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                     § 4.127

        B.      The City may allow a reduction in the minimum density for a sub-district in the Frog Pond
                West Neighborhood when it is demonstrated that the reduction is necessary due to topogra-
                phy, protection of trees, wetlands and other natural resources, constraints posed by existing
                development, infrastructure needs, provision of non-residential uses and similar physical
                conditions.

               Table 6A. Minimum and Maximum Residential Lots by Sub-District in the Frog Pond
             West Neighborhood
                                                   Frog Pond
                                                        West                     Minimum
             Area Plan Designation                 Sub-district          Lots in Sub-districta,b                 Maximum Lots in Sub-districta,b
             R-10 Large Lot                           3                               26                                        32
                                                          7                               24                                        30
                                                          8                               43                                        53
             R-7 Medium Lot                        2                               20                                        25
                                                          4                               86                                       107
                                                          5                               27                                        33
                                                          9                               10                                        13
                                                         11                              46                                        58
             R-5 Small Lot                             1                               66                                        82
                                                          6                               74                                        93
                                                         10                              30                                        38
             Civic                                           12                               0                                         7a
             Public Facilities (PF)                 13                               0                                          0

                a. Each lot must contain at least one dwelling unit but may contain additional units consistent
                with the allowance for ADUs and middle housing.

                b. For townhouses, the combined lots of the townhouse project shall be considered a single lot
                for the purposes of the minimum and maximum of this table. In no case shall the density of
                a townhouse project exceed 25 dwelling units per net acre.

                c. These metrics apply to infill housing within the Community of Hope Church property,
                should they choose to develop housing on the site. Housing in the Civic sub-district is subject
                to the R-7 Medium Lot Single Family regulations.

        C.     Table 6B establishes the minimum number of housing units that must be developed within
                each subdistrict and tax lot in the Frog Pond East and South neighborhoods. This includes
                the minimum number of units of various housing types needed to ensure a variety of housing
                options throughout the neighborhoods consistent with the Frog Pond East and South
                Master Plan. Housing unit types are defined in Section 4.001 and the footnotes to Table 6B.

Supp. No. 5                                                       CD4:169
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

               Table 6B. Minimum Number of Units in Frog Pond East and South Sub-districts
                                                                                Minimum                         Minimum                          Minimum
               Sub-Districts         Minimum Total                              Number of                       Number of                        Number of
                                                Number of Units                 Middle Housing                  Small                            Mobility-Ready
                                                                                Units A, B, G                   Units B, C, D, G                 UnitsB, C, E, F, H

                E1                          104                         26                           7                             13
               E2                          110                         28                           7                             14
               E3                          133                         34                           9                             17
               E4 H                                     211
                    E4 TL 1101
                                    I          185                         15                           4                             8
                   (portion)
                    E4 TL 1200       24                           6                             2                             3
                    E4 TL 1000       2                             1J                            1J                            0
               E5                          227                         57                           15                           29
               E6                          141                         36                           9                             18
               S1                           25                           7                             2                             4
               S2E                                        91
                    S2 TL 1000
                   28050 SW 60th                6                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Ave

                    S2 TL 800
                   5890 SW                      6                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Advance Rd

                    S2 TL 500
                   5780 SW                      5                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Advance Rd

                    S2 TL 300
                   5738 SW                      5                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Advance Rd

                    S2 TL 100
                   5696 SW                      5                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Advance Rd

                    S2 TL 900          5                             2J                            1J                            1J

                    S2 TL 700          33                           9                             3                             5
                    S2 TL 400          4                             1J                            1J                            0
                    S2 TL 200          4                             1J                            1J                            0
                    S2 TL 1100
                   28152 SW 60th                5                             2J                            1J                            1J
                   Ave

                    S2 TL 1200        5                             2J                            1J                            1J

Supp. No. 5                                                                     CD4:170
                                        PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                      § 4.127

             Table 6B. Minimum Number of Units in Frog Pond East and South Sub-districts
                                                                    Minimum                    Minimum                    Minimum
             Sub-Districts         Minimum Total                    Number of                  Number of                  Number of
                                        Number of Units             Middle Housing             Small                      Mobility-Ready
                                                                    Units A, B, G              Units B, C, D, G           UnitsB, C, E, F, H

                  S2 TL 1300
             28300 SW 60th              8                             2J                            1J                            1J
             Ave

              S3 E                                      125
                  S3 TL 1400
                28424 SW 60th           25                           7                             2J                            4
                Ave
                  S3 TL 1500
                28500 SW 60th           25                           7                             2J                            4
                Ave
                  S3 TL 1600        8                             2J                            1J                            1J

                  S3 TL 1800
                28668 SW 60th           8                             2J                            1J                            2J
                Ave

                  S3 TL 1700
                28580 SW 60th           10                           3                             1J                            2J
                Ave

                  S3 TL 1900
                5899 SW                 33                           9                             3                             5
                Kruse Rd
                  S3 TL 2000
                5691 SW                 16                           4                             1J                            2J
                Kruse Rd

              S4 D                                      158
                  S4 TL 2600        35                           9                             3                             5
                  S4 TL 2700
                28901 SW 60th           123                         31                           8                             16
                Ave
                Notes:
                A. Cluster Housing is among the housing types defined as Middle Housing in Section 4.001,
                     but only Cluster Housing meeting at least one of the criteria in this footnote shall be
                     counted as Middle Housing for the purpose of meeting the minimum number of Middle
                     Housing units in Table 6B. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent Cluster Housing
                     that is substantially the same as Single-family Dwelling Units from being counted.
                        Criteria to Determine if  Cluster Housing can be counted towards the minimum
                        number of Middle Housing units in Table 6B:
                        Criterion 1: No Middle Housing Land Division is dividing the lot on which the Cluster

Supp. No. 5                                                         CD4:171
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                     Housing is placed. A future land division is not considered if it occurs at
                                     least three years after occupancy is granted for the last dwelling unit on the
                                     lot.
                     Criterion 2: A Middle Housing Land Division is proposed but at least half of the
                                     resulting Middle Housing Land Division Units do not front on a street,
                                     tract with a private drive, or open space tract.
                     Criterion 3: A Middle Housing Land Division is proposed, but more than half of the
                                     dwelling units on the lot on which the Cluster Housing unit or units are
                                     placed are attached Middle Housing units or Cottage Cluster units.

              B. A single dwelling unit may be counted to meet the minimum requirement in multiple
                  categories. For example, a 900 square foot cottage in a cottage cluster could be counted as
                  a middle housing unit, a small unit, and a mobility-ready unit.

              C. Small dwelling units must be 1,200 square feet or less of Habitable Floor Area, as defined
                  in Section 4.001.

              D. Only required if the Net Development Area for the Stage I Master Plan area is greater
                  than two acres.

              E. Only required if the Net Development Area for the Stage I Master Plan area is greater
                  than five acres.

              F. Up to 33 percent of the minimum number of mobility-ready units, or up to one unit where
                  only one or two units are required, may have portions of the habitable floor area accessible
                  by stairs so long as the dwelling unit would still otherwise meet the definition of
                  mobility-ready unit without the habitable floor area accessed by stairs.

              G. Where a Stage I Master Plan area covers portions of multiple subdistricts, one of either
                  the middle housing OR small dwelling unit requirement for a subdistrict may be partially
                  or fully met by excess dwelling units meeting the requirement[s] from a neighboring
                  subdistrict within the same Stage I Master Plan so long as the following eligibility
                  requirements are met:
                     1. the dwelling unit category variety in Subsection (.06)E. will continue to be met for
                         each Subdistrict or portion thereof.
                     2. the minimum for the requirement in the subdistrict from which the excess is credited
                         is exceeded by at least the same amount as is being counted in the receiving
                         subdistrict so as to ensure no dwelling unit is counted towards meeting the minimum
                         in both subdistricts.
                     3. the number and type of dwelling units equal to the amount credited are adjacent to
                         the receiving subdistrict determined by being across a proposed shared property line
                         at a subdistrict boundary or across and fronting the street where a street forms the
                         subdistrict boundary.

              H. Where a Stage I Master Plan area covers portions of multiple subdistricts, the mobility-

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:172
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.127

                  ready requirement for a subdistrict may be partially or fully met by counting excess
                  mobility-ready dwelling units from a neighboring subdistrict within the same Stage I
                  Master Plan so long as the following eligibility requirements are met:

                    1. the minimum for the requirement in the subdistrict from which the excess is credited
                        is exceeded by at least the same amount as is being counted in the receiving
                        subdistrict so as to ensure no dwelling unit is counted towards meeting the minimum
                        in both subdistricts.

                    2. the number of mobility-ready dwelling units equal to the amount credited are near
                        the receiving subdistrict determined by being within a block of  the subdistrict
                        boundary.

             I. Where an application includes two or more adjacent tax lots within the same subdistrict,
                 the minimum does not need to be met on each individual tax lot so long as the total
                 number of units proposed for all the included tax lots within the same subdistrict is equal
                 to or greater than the sum of the minimums in this table for the included tax lots.

             J. Only required if a tax lot is combined with another tax lot in a Stage I Master Plan.
                 Multiple Stage I Master Plans for adjacent tax lots with the same owner or related owners
                 (i.e. LLCs with the same ownership interest) shall not be allowed concurrently or within 12
                 months.

             1.      As an alternative to Table 6B when the Net Development Area is less than 70 percent of
                    the Gross Development Area, the applicant may adjust the minimum requirements in
                    Table 6B using the following steps:

                    Step 1. Determine the Reduction Ratio. Divide the Net Development Area by a
                              number equal to 70 percent of the Gross Development Area, round to the
                              nearest 100th. This is the Reduction Ratio.

                    Step 2. Multiply each applicable minimum in Table 6B by the Reduction Ratio deter-
                              mined in Step 1. Round each result up to the nearest whole number. These are
                              the new alternative minimum requirements.

      D.     Housing Unit Types for Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods

             1.      Purpose: As further expressed in the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan, the
                    variety requirements create opportunities for a variety of  housing choices in each
                    neighborhood and subdistrict focusing on mixing and integrating different housing
                    choices throughout the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods rather than having
                    separate areas for separate housing unit categories.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:173
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Housing Unit Types and Categories for Housing Variety Standards are in Table 6C.

                                     Table 6C Housing Unit Categories and Types

                         Multi-family Category
                        Multi-family Types:
                           •  Elevator-served attached multi-family
                           •  Other attached multi-family (10 or more units per building)
                           •  Other attached multi-family (5—9 units per building)
                   Middle Housing Category
                        Middle Housing Types:
                           •  Townhouses and side by side duplex, triplex, quadplex
                           •  Stacked duplex, triplex, quadplex
                           •  Cluster housing, excluding cottage cluster, or mix of attached and detached middle
                          housing. Does not include Cluster Housing classified as Other Detached UnitsA.

                           •  Cottage cluster
                   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) Category
                        ADU Types:
                           •  All ADUs
                   Other Detached Units Category
                        Other Detached Units Types:
                           •  All other detached units including detached single-family homes, cluster housing
                          that looks and functions similar to single-family detached unitsA, and detached
                          multi-family

                     Notes:

                     A  For the purpose of this table and related variety requirements, when a lot with cluster
                         housing is divided using a Middle Housing Land Division and a resulting Land
                         Division Unit has frontage on a street, tract with a private drive, or open space tract,
                         the housing unit on the resulting land division unit shall be classified the same as a
                         detached dwelling unit on its own lot. To qualify as a Middle Housing Unit, there
                         must not be a Middle Housing Land Division or the resulting land division unit is a
                         configuration dissimilar to a lot for a detached single-family home, determined by
                         the resulting land division unit not having frontage on a street, tract with a private
                         drive, or open space tract. A future middle housing land division would not alter the
                         housing unit type as long as such middle housing land division is applied for at least
                         24 months after occupancy is granted for the dwelling unit.

       E.     Unit Type Variety for East and South Neighborhoods:

              1.      Required Number of Unit Types in a Development. To ensure variety throughout the
                     Master Plan area, while accommodating efficient site planning for smaller develop-
                     ments, the following is the number of Unit Types, listed in Table 6C, required based on
                     the Net Development Area in the smaller of a Stage I Master Plan Area or Subdistrict.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:174
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.127

                    To be counted towards the minimum Unit Type requirement, the applicable dwelling
                    units must represent, at a minimum, either five percent of the Net Development Area or
                    ten percent of the planned units within the development.
                           Two acres or less—One Unit Type Required
                           More than two acres up to five acres—Two Unit Types Required
                           More than five acres—Three Unit Types Required

             2.      Maximum Net Area for A Single Unit Type. These standards help ensure no single
                    housing unit type dominates any Subdistrict or large portion thereof. Except for small
                    developments requiring only one Unit Type under E.1. above, no more than 60 percent
                    of  the Net Development Area of  the smaller of  a Stage I Master Plan Area or
                    Subdistrict shall be planned for the development a single Unit Type listed in Table 6C.

                    a.      Where an individual lot in a development has multiple unit types (e.g. ADU on
                           same lot as Detached Unit Type), the Net Development Area shall be assigned by
                           dividing the net area of the lot and adjacent area (i.e. alleys) proportionally based
                           on number of each unit type. For example, for an ADU on a detached home lot,
                           50 percent of the net area would be assigned to the ADU and 50 percent of the net
                           area would be assigned to the detached home regardless of the relative percent of
                           the lot they each occupy.

             3.      In Subdistrict E4, Net Development Area (parking, drive aisles, landscaping) associ-
                    ated with the Commercial Main Street does not count towards Net Development Area
                    for the purpose of  these standards, but the building footprint of  the mixed-use
                    buildings does.

      F.      Pursuant to State of  Oregon middle housing statute and administrative rules, any lot
             identified for single-family development in the Stage I or II Master Plan can also be
             developed or redeveloped as middle housing even if the maximum percentage of a Middle
             Housing Unit Type, as listed in Table 6C, is exceeded. However, this does not allow the
             maximum for a single Middle Housing Unit Type to be exceeded in initial planning or
             compliance verification. This would only apply at the time of future building permit issuance
             or replat of individual lots.

(.07)  Frog Pond East and South Urban Form Types:

      A.     The Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods are divided into different Urban Form Type
             designations whose boundaries are described by Subdistrict in B. below and illustrated for
             reference in Figure A-7 below. Applicability of development standards are based on these
             designations. The designations and their purpose are as follows:

             1.      Commercial Main Street: This urban form is for a limited area along SW Brisband
                    Street between SW Stafford Road and the extension of SW 63rd Avenue. Its purpose is
                    to create a pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use commercial street feel.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:175
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Urban Form Type 1: The purpose of this Urban Form Type is to create the most
                     compact and urban of the three residential forms. This is primarily represented by
                     larger buildings, including full block width, with less setbacks than other residential
                     Urban Form Types.
              3.      Urban Form Type 2: The purpose of this Urban Form Type is to create a moderately
                     compact and urban look and feel between Urban Form Type 1 and Type 3. This is
                     primarily represented by allowing moderate building widths, including not allowing
                     buildings to be block length as allowed in Urban Form Type 1, and requiring moderate
                     setbacks.
              4.      Urban Form Type 3: The purpose of this Urban Form is to create a less compact and
                     urban look and feel. This is primarily represented by limiting the width of buildings,
                     encouraging shorter building height, and providing for larger setbacks.

       B.      Urban Form area boundary descriptions:
              1.      Subdistrict E1:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 1: The area of the Subdistrict east of the framework street that
                            is an extension of  SW 63rd Avenue and connecting to the framework street
                            crossing the BPA easement.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 2: The area of the Subdistrict west and south of the framework
                            street(s) that are an extension of SW 63rd Avenue and SW Frog Pond Lane.
                     c.      Urban Form Type 3: The area of the Subdistrict west of the framework street
                            connecting across the BPA easement and north of the framework street that is an
                            extension of SW Frog Pond Lane, except for the Frog Pond Grange area de-
                            scribed in Subsection (.24) A. below.

              2.      Subdistrict E2:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 2: A contiguous area of between 6 and 6.5 gross development
                            acres, as proposed by the developer based on the location of non-framework local
                            streets, extending the south to north extent of the Subdistrict from the BPA
                            easement to SW Kahle Road, and located immediately to the east of and adjacent
                            to the framework street connecting across the BPA easement.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 3: The far west and east area of the Subdistrict that is not
                            Urban Form Type 2.

              3.      Subdistrict E3:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 2: A contiguous area of between 8 and 8.5 gross development
                            acres, as proposed by the developer based on the location of non-framework local
                            streets, centered in the Subdistrict immediately south of and adjacent to SW
                            Kahle Road, and not being within 125 feet of the eastern edge of the Subdistrict
                            or the SROZ.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 3: The surrounding area of the Subdistrict that is not Urban
                            Form Type 2.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:176
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

             4.      Subdistrict E4:
                    a.      Commercial Main Street: The area of existing Tax Lot 1101 centered on SW
                           Brisband Street extending east to west across the Subdistrict and extending
                           between 125 feet and 160 feet both north and south of SW Brisband Street. The
                           exact boundary north and south of SW Brisband Street will be proposed by the
                           developer.
                    b.      Urban Form Type 1:
                           i.       The eastern half of the Subdistrict area north of the Commercial Main
                                  Street area.
                           ii.      The eastern half of the Subdistrict area (east of the SROZ) south of the
                                  Commercial Main Street area extending south to within approximately 250
                                  feet of SW Advance Road. The exact southern limit will be proposed by the
                                  developer based on the location of any local streets, and if no local street,
                                  based on proposed property lines. The southern limits must be between 235
                                  feet and 265 feet north of SW Advance Road. If at time of development of
                                  this area a local street is established in Subdistrict E5 serving as a boundary
                                  between Urban Form Type 1 and Urban Form Type 2 in that Subdistrict,
                                  then the boundary for this area shall be the closest street or property line to
                                  the centerline of that street measured at the intersection of SW 63rd Avenue.
                    c.      Urban Form Type 2:
                           i.       The western half of the Subdistrict area north of the Commercial Main
                                  Street area.
                           ii.      The western half of the Subdistrict area south of the Commercial Main
                                  Street area and west of the SROZ.
                           iii.     The eastern half of the Subdistrict area south of the Commercial Main
                                  Street area, east of the SROZ, and south of the Urban Form Type 1 area
                                  that is south of the Commercial Main Street area.
             5.      Subdistrict E5:
                    a.      Urban Form Type 1: the northern portion of the Subdistrict extending south to
                           within approximately 250 feet of SW Advance Road and extending east to west
                           across the entire Subdistrict. The exact southern limit will be proposed by the
                           developer based on the location of an east-west local street which would be the
                           boundary between Urban Form Type Areas. The centerline of this boundary
                           street must be between 230 feet and 270 feet north of SW Advance Road and is
                           encouraged to be as close as possible to 250 feet north.
                    b.      Urban Form Type 2: The southern portion of the Subdistrict south of the Urban
                           Form Type 1 area and north of SW Advance Road.

             6.      Subdistrict E6:
                    a.      Urban Form Type 2: the western portion of  the Subdistrict extending east
                           approximately 680 feet east from SW 60th Avenue. The exact eastern limit will be

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:177
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                            proposed by the developer based on the location of a local street or property lines
                            which would be the boundary between Urban Form Type Areas. The boundary
                            must be between 660 feet and 700 [feet] east of SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged
                            to be a[as] close as possible to 680 feet.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 3: The eastern portion of the Subdistrict east of the Urban
                            Form Type 2 area, north of SW Advance Road and south of the BPA Easement.
              7.      Subdistrict S1:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 2: The entire Subdistrict is Urban Form Type 2.
              8.      Subdistrict S2:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 2: The western portion of the Subdistrict, extending east of
                            SW 60th Avenue approximately 360 feet east from the northern boundary of SW
                            Advance Road to a point 340 feet south of SW Advance Road and approximately
                            500 feet east of SW 60th Avenue from that point to the southern boundary of the
                            Subdistrict. The exact limits will be proposed by the developer based on the
                            location of a local streets or property lines which would be the boundary between
                            Urban Form Type areas. The east boundary must be, respectively, between 480
                            feet and 520 feet east of SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged to be as close as
                            possible to 500 feet in the southern portion, and between 320 and 360 feet east of
                            SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged to be as close as possible to 340 feet in the
                            northern portion of the Subdistrict.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 3: The eastern portion of the Subdistrict, east of the Urban
                            Form Type 2 area.
              9.      Subdistrict S3:
                     a.      Urban Form Type 1: a west central portion of the Subdistrict extending approx-
                            imately 220 feet east of SW 60th Avenue between a point directly east of the
                            northern boundary of Subdistrict S4 (the southern property line of the Meridian
                            Creek Middle School property) and a point approximately 320 feet north of SW
                            Kruse Road. The exact limits will be proposed by the developer based on the
                            location of local streets or property lines which would be the boundary between
                            Urban Form Type areas. The east boundary must be between 200 feet and 240
                            feet east of SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged to be as close as possible to 220
                            feet. The north boundary must be within 20 feet of the northern boundary of
                            Subdistrict S4 and is encourage to be as close as possible to that boundary. The
                            south boundary must be between 300 feet and 340 feet north of SW Kruse Road
                            and is encouraged to be as close as possible to 320 feet.
                     b.      Urban Form Type 2: The description is broken into a northern and southern area,
                            with the boundary between northern and southern area being a line extending
                            east from the northern boundary of Subdistrict S4 (the southern property line of
                            the Meridian Creek Middle School property).
                            i.       For the northern area of  the Subdistrict: The western portion of  the
                                   Subdistrict extending from SW 60th Avenue to the east approximately 500

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.127

                                  feet. The exact limits will be proposed by the developer based on the
                                  location of a local streets or property lines which would be the boundary
                                  between Urban Form Type areas. The east boundary must be, respectively,
                                  between 480 feet and 520 [feet] east of SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged to
                                  be a[s] close as possible to 500 feet.

                           ii.      For the southern area of  the Subdistrict: The western portion of  the
                                  Subdistrict, excluding the Urban Form Type 1 area, extending from SW
                                  60th Avenue to the east approximately 340 feet. The exact limits will be
                                  proposed by the developer based on the location of  a local streets or
                                  property lines which would be the boundary between Urban Form Type
                                  areas. The east boundary must be between 320 [feet] and 360 feet east of SW
                                  60th Avenue and is encouraged to be as close as possible to 340 feet.

                    c.      Urban Form Type 3: The eastern portion of the Subdistrict, east of the Urban
                           Form Type 2 areas.

             10.    Subdistrict S4:

                    a.      Urban Form Type 1: The northeastern portion of the Subdistrict extending west
                           of SW 60th Avenue approximately 380 feet and south to approximately 320 feet
                           north of SW Kruse Road. The exact western and southern limit will be proposed
                           by the developer based on the location of local streets or property lines which
                           would be the boundary between Urban Form Type areas. The west boundary
                           must be between 360 feet and 400 feet west of SW 60th Avenue and is encouraged
                           to be as close as possible to 380 feet. The south boundary must be between 300
                           feet and 340 feet north of SW Kruse Road and is encouraged to be as close as
                           possible to 320 feet.

                    b.      Urban Form Type 2: The northeastern portion of the Subdistrict west and south
                           of the Urban Form Type 1 area, extending west from the Urban Form Type 1
                           boundary to approximately 570 feet west of SW 60th Avenue and south to a future
                           local street extension of SW Kruse Road. The exact western limit will be pro-
                           posed by the developer based on the location of a local streets or property lines
                           which would be the boundary between Urban Form Type areas. The west
                           boundary must be between 550 feet and 590 feet west of SW 60th Avenue and is
                           encouraged to be as close as possible to 570 feet.

                    c.      Urban Form Type 3: The western and southern portions of the Subdistrict, west
                           and south of the Urban Form Type 2 area.

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:178.1
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                 Figure A-7 Urban Form Type Land Use Designation
                                                      Boundaries

(.08)  Development Standards:

       A.     Unless otherwise specified by the regulations in this Residential Neighborhood (RN) Zone
              section, all development must comply with Section 4.113, Standards Applying to Residential
              Development in Any Zone.

       B.      Development shall be consistent with this Code and applicable provisions of an approved
              legislative master plan.

       C.     Unless superseded or supplemented by other provisions of the Development Code the lot
              and development standards for the Frog Pond West Neighborhood are established by Table
              8A and lot and development standards for the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods are
              established by Table 8B.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.2
                                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                          § 4.127

        D.     Lot Standards for Small Lot Sub-districts in the Frog Pond West Neighborhood. The
                 purpose of these standards is to ensure that development in the Small Lot Sub-districts
                 includes varied design that avoids homogenous street frontages, creates active pedestrian
                 street frontages and has open space that is integrated into the development pattern.
                 Standards. Planned developments in the Small Lot Sub-districts shall include one or more of
                 the following elements on each block:

                 1.      Alleys.
                 2.      Residential main entries grouped around a common green or entry courtyard (e.g.
                         cluster housing).

                 3.      Four or more residential main entries facing a pedestrian connection allowed by an
                         applicable legislative master plan.
                 4.      Garages recessed at least four feet from the front façade or six feet from the front of a
                         front porch.

                  Table 8A: Frog Pond West Neighborhood Lot Development Standards
                                                                                                                   Setbacks K, L, M
                                                                                                                                   Garage      Garage
                                                            Max.       Min.        Max.                                            Min         Min
                                    Min.        Min.        Lot        Lot     I,  Bldg.                                           Setback     Setback
             Neighborhood           Lot Size    Lot         Cover-     Width       Height      Front       Rear        Side        from        from
             Zone                   (sq.        Depth       age        J, N        H           Min.        Min.        Min.        Alley       StreetO,P
             Sub-District           ft.)A,B     (ft.)       (%)        (ft.)       (ft.)       (ft.)       (ft.)       (note)      (ft.)       (ft.)
             R-10 Large Lot    8,000       60'           40% E       40            35            20F          20                    M             18G          20
             R-7 Medium             6,000C     60'           45% E       35            35            15 F         15                    M             18G          20
             Lot
             R-5 Small Lot      4,000C,D  60'           60% E       35            35            12F          15                    M             18G          20
                 Notes:
                 A. Minimum lot size may be reduced to 80% of minimum lot size for any of the following three reasons: (1) where
                     necessary to preserve natural resources (e.g. trees, wetlands) and/or provide active open space, (2) lots designated
                     for cluster housing (Frog Pond West Master Plan), (3) to increase the number of lots up to the maximum number
                     allowed so long as for each lot reduced in size a lot meeting the minimum lot size is designated for development
                     of a duplex or triplex.
                 B. For townhouses the minimum lot size in all sub-districts is 1,500 square feet.
                 C. In R-5 and R-7 sub-districts the minimum lot size for quadplexes and cottage clusters is 7,000 square feet.
                 D. In R-5 sub-districts the minimum lot size for triplexes is 5,000 square feet.
                 E. On lots where multiple buildings are built, maximum lot coverage may be increased by 10%. Cottage clusters are
                     exempt from maximum lot coverage standards.
                 F. Front porches may extend 5 feet into the front setback.
                 G. The garage setback from alley shall be minimum of 18 feet to a garage door facing the alley in order to provide
                     a parking apron. Otherwise, the rear or side setback shall be between 3 and 5 feet.
                 H. Vertical encroachments are allowed up to ten additional feet, for up to 10% of the building footprint; vertical
                     encroachments shall not be habitable space.
                 I. For townhouses in all sub-districts minimum lot width is 20 feet.
                 J. May be reduced to 24' when the lot fronts a cul-de-sac. No street frontage is required when the lot fronts on an
                    approved, platted private drive or a public pedestrian access in a cluster housing (Frog Pond West Master Plan)
                    development.
                 K. Front Setback is measured as the offset of the front lot line or a vehicular or pedestrian access easement line. On
                     lots with alleys, Rear Setback shall be measured from the rear lot line abutting the alley.
                 L. For cottage clusters and ADUs all setbacks otherwise greater than 10 feet for other housing types are reduced to
                     10 feet

Supp. No. 5                                                          CD4:178.3
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                  M. On lots greater than 10,000 SF with frontage 70 ft. or wider, the minimum combined side yard setbacks shall
                       total 20 ft. with a minimum of 10 ft. On other lots, minimum side setback shall be 5 ft. On a corner lot, minimum
                       side setbacks are 10 feet.
                  N. For cluster housing (Frog Pond West Master Plan) with lots arranged on a courtyard, frontage shall be measured
                      at the front door face of the building adjacent to a public right-of-way or a public pedestrian access easement
                      linking the courtyard with the Public Way.
                  O. All lots with front-loaded garages are limited to one shared standard-sized driveway/apron per street regardless
                      of the number of units on the lot.
                  P. The garage shall be setback a minimum of 18 feet from any sidewalk easements that parallels the street.
                   Table 8B. Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods Development Standards

                                                                                  Maxi-                                                 Min.
                                                                                  mum                                                   distance
              Land                                                                Building                                              Between
              Use Map                    Min. lot                                 Width                                                 multiple      Max.
              Urban         Lot size     width/        Max                        Facing       Rear                        Side         Buildings     Lot
              Form          require-     street        height       Front         Street, or   Min.          Garages       Min.         on same       Coverage
              Type          ments        frontage      (ft.)        Setbacks      park         (ft.)         (note)        (ft.) A B    lot along     (percent)
              Designa-                   per lot                                  when                                                  street        C D
              tion                       (ft.)                                    front of                                              frontages
                                                                                  lot faces                                             and
                                                                                  a park                                                public
                                                                                  (ft.)                                                 viewsheds
              Urban         Lots                                    See
              Form          sized to     10             50, 4 story Table         None        10                           5F             Double the min.
              Type 1        accom-                                  8C.                                                                 side yard
                            modate                                                125 ex-                                               setback
                            at least a                                            cept that                                             that
                            one-unit                                              buildings                                             would be
                            residen-                                              over 100                                              required
              Urban         tial                                                  feet can-                                             for the       80
              Form          building     15                                       not oc-      10                               5F      larger of     except
              Type 2        meeting                                               cupy                                                  the two       for de-
                            building                                              entire                                                buildings     tached
                            code                                                  block                                                 on its        homes
                            require-                                              face.G                     E                          own lot.      on lots
                            ments as                   40,                                                                                            with an
                            well as                    3-story                                                             5 for                      area
                            setbacks                                                                                       struc-                     4,000
                            and lot                                                                                        tures up                   square
                            coverage                                                                                       to 25 feet                 feet or
              Urban         require-                                                                                       in                         greater.I
              Form          ments.                                                                                         height,
              Type 3                        15                                                 100           15H           10 for
                                                                                                                           struc-
                                                                                                                           tures
                                                                                                                           over 25
                                                                                                                           feet in
                                                                                                                           height.
                  Notes:
                  A.       On corner lots, minimum side setbacks facing the street are the same as minimum front setback. Maximum
                           setbacks equivalent to front maximums also apply. See Table 8C.
                  B.        Side setbacks do not apply to shared walls at property lines between townhouse units.
                  C.        Cottage clusters and ADUs are exempt from maximum lot coverage standards.
                  D.       For townhouses maximum lot coverage is calculated for the combined lots on which a single townhouse
                           building sits rather than for each townhouse lot.
                  E.        Setbacks for residential garages are as follows:
                           1.        Front (street loaded): minimum 20 feet.
                           2.        Alley loaded with exterior driveway: minimum 18 feet or as necessary to create a[an] 18 foot deep
                                    parking space not including alley curb.
                           3.        Alley loaded without exterior driveway: minimum 3 feet and maximum 5 feet.
                  F.        For Urban Form Type 1 and 2, side setbacks may be reduced to either: (1) down to a minimum of 3.5 feet for
                           residential structures less than 70 feet wide, or (2) down to a minimum of five percent of the building width
                           at the front building line for buildings greater than 70 feet and less than 100 feet wide.
                  G.       For Urban Form Type 2, in lieu of meeting the maximum building width, an applicant may elect to articulate
                           the facade and roof in a manner to create architectural separation of building masses. Such articulation shall
                           include a minimum 2-foot setback of the wall from the primary façade as well as interruption of the roof

Supp. No. 5                                                             CD4:178.4
                                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                         § 4.127

                         plane. The setback articulation shall, at a minimum, be equal in width to the building separation required.
                         The depth and width of articulation is not adjustable or subject to waiver or administrative relief under local
                         or state law as it is an optional compliance method in lieu of meeting the standard maximum building width
                         and separation standards. For the purpose of applying other articulation standards in Section 4.113, the
                         portions of a building on either side of the articulation in lieu of building separation shall be considered
                         separate buildings.
                 H.       The minimum rear setback for a cottage cluster and Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) is 10 feet.
                 I.         For lots 4,000 square feet in area or more with only units classified as "Other Detached Units" in Table 6C,
                         the following lot coverage standards from Table 8A shall apply: 4,000 square feet or more but less than 6,000
                         square feet: standards of R-5 Small Lot; 6,000 square feet or more but less than 8,000 square feet: standards
                         for R-7 Medium Lot; 8,000 square feet or more, standards for R-10 Large Lot.

                   Table 8C. Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods Development Standards - Front Setbacks including Special Front
             Setbacks For Uniformity on Framework Streets
                                                                                                                Front
                                                                                                                Min. (ft.)A          Front Max.C (ft.)
             • Lot frontages along east-west oriented portion of SW Brisband Street between                     6B                         10D
                SW 63rd Avenue and its eastern most point. Setbacks for SW Brisband Street
                between SW Stafford Road and SW 63rd Avenue can be found in Table 23A.
             • Lot frontages along SW 63rd Avenue from southern edge of Subdistrict E1 to SW
                Advance Road
             • Lot frontages on lots with Urban Form Type 1 Designation not fronting a
                framework street listed in this table
             • Lot frontages along SW 60th Avenue                                                               10                         25E
             • Lot frontages along SW 63rd Avenue south of SW Advance Road
             • Lot frontages along SW Stafford Road except the Brisband Main Street build-
                ings
             • Lot frontages along SW Advance Road
             • Lot frontages along SW Kahle Road
             • Lot frontages along Framework Street in Subdistrict E1 extending SW Frog
                Pond Lane and SW 63rd Avenue
             • Lot frontages along Framework Street connecting across the BPA easement area
                from SW Kahle Road to SW Frog Pond Lane extension
             • Lot frontages on lots with Urban Form Type 2 Designation not fronting a
                framework street listed in this table
             • Lot frontages on lots with Urban Form Type 3 Designation not fronting a                          10E                       No max
                framework street listed in this table
                 Notes:
                 A.       Where a front (street) loaded garage exists, the minimum garage setback in Table 8B takes precedence over the
                         minimums in this table.
                 B.        Where the minimum front setback is 6 feet it is intended to accommodate a public utility easement (PUE) for
                         franchise utilities. If the City requires a wider PUE the minimum setback shall increase to accommodate the
                         PUE. If a finding can be made that no PUE is necessary and access stairs or ramps can be accommodated
                         without impeding on the public right of way, no setback is required.
                 C.        Where a maximum setback exists, and the property line it is measured from is either curvilinear or intersects
                         with a connecting property line at anything besides a right angle, the maximum setback need only be met at
                         one point along the property line.
                 D.       This maximum assumes no front (street loaded) garage, which is anticipated to be the typical condition in
                         Urban Form Type 1. However, if a front facing garage is proposed, the front maximum may be exceeded to
                         accommodate the minimum garage setback of 20 feet from Table 8B.
                 E.        In Urban Form 3, buildings or portions thereof greater than either 2 stories or 25 feet in height shall have a
                         minimum front setback of 20 feet.
        E.     Development Standards Specific to Relationships with Collectors and Arterial Streets.
                 1.      Frog Pond West Neighborhood:
                         a.      Lots adjacent to SW Boeckman Road and SW Stafford Road shall meet the
                                  following standards:
                                  i.       Rear or side yards adjacent to SW Boeckman Road and SW Stafford Road
                                          shall provide a wall and landscaping consistent with the standards in Figure
                                          10 of the Frog Pond West Master Plan.

Supp. No. 5                                                         CD4:178.5
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     b.      Lots adjacent to the collector-designated portions of SW Willow Creek Drive
                            and SW Frog Pond Lane shall not have driveways accessing lots from these
                            streets, unless no practical alternative exists for access. Lots in Large Lot Sub-
                            districts are exempt from this standard.

              2.      Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods:

                     a.      Special Design Standards for east side of SW Stafford Road as well as the north
                            side of SW Advance Road from SW Stafford Road to the wetland approximately
                            250 feet east of SW Stafford Road:

                            i.       Courtyard Walls and Pedestrian Access Points:

                                   1.      Except for pedestrian access points, the frontage of each lot or tract
                                          (not counting any landscape tract running parallel with the road)
                                          shall have a wall/fence matching Figure A-8. below.

                                   Figure A-8. Wall/Fence Along SW Stafford Road

                                   2.      Except for corner lots at the intersection of SW Stafford Road and
                                          SW Brisband Street, each lot shall have at least one paved walkway
                                          extending from the lot to the Stafford Road sidewalk providing a
                                          pedestrian access point. Any gates at pedestrian access points shall
                                          have a black "iron style" gate matching the style shown in Figure B-8.
                                          below.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.6
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

                                          Figure B-8. Gate for Pedestrian Ac-
                                       cess Points along SW Stafford Road

                            ii.      Structure and Entry Orientation: Except for corner lots at the intersection
                                   of SW Stafford Road and SW Brisband Street, the facades of structures
                                   facing SW Stafford Road shall meet all design standards for front facades.
                                   Generally this will be the front façade of the structure, but if it is the side or
                                   rear façade, the façade must still meet front façade standards including
                                   having at least one building entrance oriented towards SW Stafford Road.

                     b.      Special Design Standards for SW Advance Road, except for the portion on the
                            north side included in the SW Stafford Road special design standards in a. above:
                            i.       Only front yards shall be oriented towards SW Advance Road with front
                                   entrances facing the street, except for corner lots at intersecting streets
                                   where side yards and side facades may front SW Advance Road, as neces-
                                   sary.
                            ii.      Lots shall have courtyard fencing matching Figure C-8. including any side
                                   yards for lots oriented on intersecting streets.

                                                         Figure C-8.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.7
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                            iii.     No motor vehicle access is allowed directly to a lot or tract from SW
                                   Advance Road except for emergency access requested by the Fire District
                                   and approved by the City Engineer.
                            iv.     Lots directly adjacent to SW Advance Road shall be considered to front SW
                                   Advance Road even if a landscape tract exists between the lot and the SW
                                   Advance Road right-of-way.

       F.      Public Realm Requirements for Frog Pond East and South Master Plan area

              1.      Development in Frog Pond East and South shall conform with the public realm
                     element in Chapter 7 of the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan in the following
                     ways with the referenced figures, tables, and text from the Frog Pond East and South
                     Master Plan incorporated into this Subsection by reference as if fully stated herein:

                     a.      Active transportation connections shall be provided as shown in Figure 20.

                     b.      Street trees shall be provided consistent with Figure 26 and the text on pages 91
                            through 94.

                     c.      Public lighting shall be provided consistent with Figure 27 and the text on pages
                            95 through 99.

                     d.      Gateway treatment and monument signs shall be provided consistent with and
                            limited to what is shown and described in Figure 28, Table 6, and the text on page
                            102.

                     e.      Sign toppers or "sign caps" shall be provided on street signs as described on page
                            102 and shown in Figure D-8 below consistent with the City's Public Works
                            Standards.

                                       Figure D-8. Frog Pond Street Sign Topper

                     f.       Consistent with Figure 18 and the text on page 77, the East Neighborhood Park
                            shall be a minimum of three acres in size, not including the BPA easement area,
                            and located directly adjacent to the BPA easement in Subdistricts E5 and/or E6.
                            The park shall also have frontage on SW Brisband Street. Park location shall

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.8
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

                            provide a terminal vista on the north end of SW 60th Avenue and may provide a
                            terminal vista on the east end of SW Brisband Street. Park features and amenities
                            shall be consistent with the description on Page 78.
                     g.      A "Main Street Gateway" feature shall be provided on SW Brisband Street at SW
                            Stafford Road. The feature shall:
                            i.       be at least 20 feet in height so as to be visible from a distance, the Develop-
                                   ment Review Board may approve height shorter than 20 feet upon the
                                   finding that the gateway feature remains clearly and prominently visible
                                   from 1,000 feet away;
                            ii.      be at least three feet in width and length, on average;
                            iii.     incorporate both sides of SW Brisband Street or be centered within the
                                   round-a-bout;
                            iv.     include materials and other design elements representative of Frog Pond
                                   East and South as outlined and depicted in the Frog Pond East and South
                                   Master Plan; and
                            v.      be professionally designed by a professional(s) with experience designing
                                   such gateway features. An affidavit of such professional's credentials shall
                                   be included in the development application material.
                            vi.     The "Main Street Gateway" design is subject to Site Design Review. Addi-
                                   tionally, the design is encouraged, but not required, to be coordinated with
                                   and reviewed by the Arts, Cultural, and Heritage Commission. Any review
                                   comments by the Arts, Cultural, and Heritage Commission shall be for-
                                   warded to the Development Review Board as part of the record for Site
                                   Design Review.

(.09)  Open Space:

       A.     Purpose. The purposes of these standards for the Residential Neighborhood Zone are to:
              1.      Provide light, air, open space, and useable recreation facilities to occupants of each
                     residential development.
              2.      Retain and incorporate natural resources and trees as part of developments.
              3.      Provide access and connections to trails and adjacent open space areas.
                     For Neighborhood Zones which are subject to adopted legislative master plans, the
                     standards work in combination with, and as a supplement to, the park and open space
                     recommendations of  those legislative master plans. These standards supersede the
                     Open Space requirements in WC Section 4.113(.01).

       B.      Within the Frog Pond West Neighborhood, the following standards apply:
              1.      Properties within the R-10 Large Lot sub-districts and R-7 Medium Lot sub-districts
                     are exempt from the requirements of this section. If the Development Review Board
                     finds, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that there is a need for open space,
                     they may waive this exemption and require open space proportional to the need.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.9
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      For properties within the R-5 Small Lot sub-districts, Open Space Area shall be
                     provided in the following manner:

                     a.      Ten percent of the net developable area shall be in open space. Net developable
                            area does not include land for non-residential uses, SROZ-regulated lands, streets
                            and private drives, alleys and pedestrian connections. Open space must include at
                            least 50 percent usable open space as defined by this Code and other like space
                            that the Development Review Board finds will meet the purpose of this section.
                     b.      Natural resource areas such as tree groves and/or wetlands, and unfenced low
                            impact development storm water management facilities, may be counted toward
                            the ten percent requirement at the discretion of the Development Review Board.
                            Fenced storm water detention facilities do not count toward the open space
                            requirement. Pedestrian connections may also be counted toward the ten percent
                            requirement.

                     c.      The minimum land area for an individual open space is 2,000 square feet, unless
                            the Development Review Board finds, based on substantial evidence in the
                            record, that a smaller minimum area adequately fulfills the purpose of this Open
                            Space standard.

                     d.      The Development Review Board may reduce or waive the usable open space
                            requirement in accordance with Section 4.118(.03). The Board shall consider
                            substantial evidence regarding the following factors: the walking distance to
                            usable open space adjacent to the subject property or within 500 feet of it; the
                            amount and type of open space available adjacent or within 500 feet of the
                            subject property, including facilities which support creative play.
                     e.      The Development Review Board may specify the method of assuring the long-
                            term protection and maintenance of open space and/or recreational areas. Where
                            such protection or maintenance are the responsibility of  a private party or
                            homeowners' association, the City Attorney shall review any pertinent bylaws,
                            covenants or agreements prior to recordation.

       C.     Within the Frog Pond East and South Master Plans open space shall be provided consistent
              with the requirements in Subsection 4.113(.01)C.—F., and designed and located according to
              the following criteria:

              1.      Green Focal Points. For the East and South Neighborhoods, Green Focal Points are
                     intended to serve as central neighborhood destinations or gathering places that con-
                     tribute to neighborhood character and identity. Green Focal Points can take a variety
                     of forms, including community garden plots, small playgrounds or splash pads, nature
                     play areas, pocket parks or plazas, and central green courtyards within housing
                     developments.  As  part  of  meeting  the  open  space  requirements  in  Subsection
                     4.113(.01)C.—F. for a Stage I Master Plan Area, each Subdistrict in Frog Pond East
                     and South shall have at least one Green Focal Point meeting the 2,000 square foot size
                     requirement in Subsection 4.113(.01)D.1. Even if the usable open space requirement is

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:178.10
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

                     otherwise met, each subdistrict shall still have the minimum 2,000 square foot Green
                     Focal Point. In addition to the standards in Subsection 4.113(.01)C.—F., the following
                     requirements apply:
                     a.      Location requirements by Subdistrict:
                            •           Subdistrict  E1: Green Focal Point to be located north of the Frog Pond
                                     Grange building or in the tree grove near the existing home at 27480 SW
                                     Stafford Road.
                            •          Subdistrict E3: A Green Focal Point to be located at trailhead adjacent to
                                    SROZ leading to the south.
                            •          Subdistrict E4: A plaza space to be integrated with the Brisband Street
                                    Main Street mixed-use development.
                            •          Subdistrict S2: A Green Focal Point to be located and aligned with
                                    terminus of future extension of SW Hazel Street.
                            •          Subdistrict S3: A Green Focal Point to be located near northern end of
                                    Kruse Creek.
                            •          If Subdistrict is not listed above, a Green Focal Point is still required, but
                                    there is no special locational requirement.
                     b.      Direct access to one or more Green Focal Points shall be provided from each
                            residential lot in the neighborhood. Direct access, for the purpose of this require-
                            ment, means: a pedestrian would need to travel on no more than two different
                            streets to reach a green focal point from the lot frontage of the home to an open
                            space frontage.
              2.      East Neighborhood Park. See Subsection 4.127(.08)F.1.f. above.

(.10)  Block, access and connectivity standards:

       A.     Purpose. These standards are intended to regulate and guide development to create: a
              cohesive and connected pattern of streets, pedestrian connections and bicycle routes; safe,
              direct and convenient routes to schools and other community destinations; and, neighbor-
              hoods that support active transportation and Safe Routes to Schools.

       B.      Blocks, access and connectivity shall comply with adopted legislative master plans:
              1.      Within the Frog Pond West Neighborhood, streets shall be consistent with Figure 18,
                     Street Demonstration Plan, in the Frog Pond West Master Plan. The Street Demon-
                     stration Plan is intended to be guiding, not binding. Variations from the Street
                     Demonstration Plan may be approved by the Development Review Board, upon
                     finding that one or more of the following justify the variation: barriers such as existing
                     buildings and topography; designated Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas; tree
                     groves, wetlands or other natural resources; existing or planned parks and other active
                     open space that will serve as pedestrian connections for the public; alignment with
                     property lines and ownerships that result in efficient use of  land while providing
                     substantially equivalent connectivity for the public; and/or site design that provides
                     substantially equivalent connectivity for the public.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.11
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      In the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods, or if a legislative master plan does
                      not provide sufficient guidance for a specific development or situation, the block and
                      access standards in Section 4.124(.09) apply.

(.11)  Signs. Per the requirements of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11 and applicable provisions from
       adopted legislative master plans.

(.12)  Parking. Per the requirements of Section 4.155 and applicable provisions from adopted legislative
       master plans.

(.13)  Corner Vision Clearance. Per the requirements of Section 4.177.

(.14)  Main Entrance Standards:

       A.     Purpose. These standards:

              1.      Support a physical and visual connection between the living area of the residence and
                      the street;

              2.      Enhance public safety for residents and visitors and provide opportunities for commu-
                      nity interaction;

              3.      Ensure that the pedestrian entrance is visible or clearly identifiable from the street by its
                      orientation or articulation; and

              4.      Ensure a connection to the public realm for development on lots fronting both private
                      and public streets by making the pedestrian entrance visible or clearly identifiable from
                      the public street.

       B.      Location. At least one main entrance for each structure must:

              1.      Be within 12 feet of the longest street-facing front wall of the dwelling unit; and

              2.      Either;

                      a.      Face the street;

                      b.      Be at an angle of up to 45 degrees from the street; or

                      c.      Open onto a porch. The porch must:

                             (i)     Be at least six feet deep;

                             (ii)    Have at least one entrance facing the street; and

                             (iii)   Be covered with a roof or trellis.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:178.12
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.127

(.15)  Garage Standards:

       A.     Purpose. These standards:

              1.      Ensure that there is a physical and visual connection between the living area of the
                     residences and the street;

              2.      Ensure that the location and amount of the living area of the residence, as seen from the
                     street, is more prominent than garages;

              3.      Prevent garages from obscuring the main entrance from the street and ensure that the
                     main entrance for pedestrians, rather than automobiles, is the prominent entrance;

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:178.13
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              4.      Provide for a pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing garages and vehicle areas
                     from dominating the views of the neighborhood from the sidewalk; and
              5.      Enhance public safety by preventing garages from blocking views of the street from
                     inside the residence.

       B.      Street-Facing Garage Walls:

              1.      Where these regulations apply. Unless exempted, the regulations of this subsection
                     apply to garages accessory to residential units.
              2.      Exemptions:
                     a.      Garages on flag lots.
                     b.      Development on lots which slope up or down from the street with an average
                            slope of 20 percent or more.
              3.      Standards:
                     a.      The width of the garage door may be up to 50 percent of the length of the
                            street-facing façade as measured from the interior of the frame surrounding the
                            garage door.
                     b.      The garage door must be recessed at least four feet from the front façade or six feet
                            from the front of a front porch.
                     c.      The maximum driveway width is 18 feet.
                     d.      Where a dwelling abuts a rear or side alley or a shared driveway, the garage shall
                            orient to the alley or shared drive.
                     e.      Where three or more contiguous garage parking bays are proposed facing the
                            same street, the garage opening closest to a side property line shall be recessed at
                            least two feet behind the adjacent opening(s) to break up the street facing
                            elevation and diminish the appearance of the garage from the street. Side-loaded
                            garages, i.e., where the garage openings are turned away from the street, are
                            exempt from this requirement.
                     f.       A garage entry that faces a street may be no closer to the street than the longest
                            street facing wall of the dwelling unit. There must be at least 20 feet between the
                            garage door and the sidewalk. This standard does not apply to garage entries that
                            do not face the street.

(.16)  Residential Design Standards:

       A.     Purpose. These standards:
              1.      Support consistent quality standards so that each home contributes to the quality and
                     cohesion of the larger neighborhood and community.

              2.      Support the creation of architecturally varied structures, blocks and neighborhoods,
                     whether a neighborhood develops all at once or one lot at a time, avoiding homoge-
                     neous street frontages that detract from the community's appearance.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.14
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

       B.      Applicability. In the Frog Pond West Neighborhood standards C. through G. apply to all
              façades facing streets, pedestrian connections, parks, open space tracts, the Boeckman Trail,
              or elsewhere as required by this Code or the Development Review Board. Exemptions from
              these standards include: (1) Additions or alterations adding less than 50 percent to the
              existing floor area of the structure; and, (2) Additions or alterations not facing a street,
              pedestrian connection, park, or open space tract. In the Frog Pond East and South Neigh-
              borhoods, the standards in C. through G. do not apply. Rather, design standards in 4.113(.14)
              apply to all public-facing facades in the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods.

       C.     Windows. The standards for minimum percentage of façade surface area in windows are
              below. These standards apply only to facades facing streets, pedestrian connections, parks,
              and open space tracts.

              1.      For two-story structures:
                     a.      15 percent front facades.
                     b.      12.5 percent—front facades if a minimum of six design elements are provided per
                            Section 4.127(0.15)E., Design Menu.
                     c.      Ten percent—front facades facing streets if a minimum of seven design elements
                            are provided per Section 4.127(0.15)E., Design Menu.

              2.      For one-story structures:
                     a.      12.5 percent—front facades.
                     b.      Ten percent—front facades if a minimum of six design elements are provided per
                            Section 4.127(0.15)E., Design Menu.

              3.      For all structures: Five percent for street-side facades.

              4.      Windows used to meet this standard must provide views from the building to the street.
                     Glass block does not meet this standard. Windows in garage doors and other doors
                     count toward this standard.

              5.      Street-facing facades along Boeckman Road and Stafford Road must meet the stan-
                     dards for front facades.

       D.     Articulation. Plans for residential buildings shall incorporate design features such as varying
              rooflines, offsets, balconies, projections (e.g., overhangs, porches, or similar features), re-
              cessed or covered entrances, window reveals, or similar elements that break up otherwise
              long, uninterrupted elevations. Such elements shall occur at a minimum interval of 30 feet on
              façades facing streets, pedestrian connections, parks, open space tracts, or elsewhere as
              required by this Code or the Development Review Board. Where a façade governed by this
              standard is less than 30 feet in length, at least one of  the above-cited features shall be
              provided.

       E.     Residential Design Menu. Residential structures shall provide a minimum of five of the
              design elements listed below for front façades and façades facing Boeckman Road and
              Stafford Road, unless otherwise specified by the code. For side façades facing streets,

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:178.15
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              pedestrian connections, parks, open space tracts, a minimum of three of the design elements
              must be provided. Where a design feature includes more than one element, it is counted as
              only one of the five required elements.
              1.      Dormers at least three feet wide.
              2.      Covered porch entry—minimum 48 square foot covered front porch, minimum six feet
                     deep and minimum of a six foot deep cover. A covered front stoop with minimum 24
                     square foot area, four foot depth and hand rails meets this standard.
              3.      Front porch railing around at least two sides of the porch.
              4.      Front facing second story balcony - projecting from the wall of the building a minimum
                     of four feet and enclosed by a railing or parapet wall.
              5.      Roof overhang of 16 inches or greater.
              6.      Columns, pillars or posts at least four inches wide and containing larger base materials.
              7.      Decorative gables - cross or diagonal bracing, shingles, trim, corbels, exposed rafter
                     ends or brackets (does not include a garage gable if garage projects beyond dwelling
                     unit portion of street façade).
              8.      Decorative molding above windows and doors.
              9.      Decorative pilaster or chimneys.
              10.    Shakes, shingles, brick, stone or other similar decorative materials occupying at least 60
                     square feet of the street façade.
              11.    Bay or bow windows - extending a minimum of 12 inches outward from the main wall
                     of a building and forming a bay or alcove in a room within the building.
              12.    Sidelight and/or transom windows associated with the front door or windows in the
                     front door.
              13.    Window grids on all façade windows (excluding any windows in the garage door or
                     front door).
              14.    Maximum nine foot wide garage doors or a garage door designed to resemble two
                     smaller garage doors and/or windows in the garage door (only applicable to street
                     facing garages).
              15.    Decorative base materials such as natural stone, cultured stone or brick extending at
                     least 36 inches above adjacent finished grade occupying a minimum of ten percent of
                     the overall primary street facing façade.
              16.    Entry courtyards which are visible from, and connected directly to, the street. Court-
                     yards shall have a minimum depth of ten feet and minimum width of 80 percent of the
                     non-garage/driveway building width to be counted as a design element.

       F.      House Plan Variety. No two directly adjacent or opposite residential structures may possess
              the same front or street-facing elevation. A structure containing multiple middle housing
              units shall be considered a single residential structure for the purpose of house plan variety.
              This standard is met when front or street-facing elevations differ from one another due to

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.16
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.127

              different materials, articulation, roof type, inclusion of a porch, fenestration, and/or number
              of  stories. Where façades repeat on the same block face, they must have at least three
              intervening residential structures between them that meet the above standard. Small Lot
              developments over ten acres shall include duplexes and/or two-unit townhouses comprising
              ten percent of the homes—corner locations are preferred.

       G.     Prohibited Building Materials. The following construction materials may not be used as an
              exterior finish:
              1.      Vinyl siding.
              2.      Wood fiber hardboard siding.
              3.      Oriented strand board siding.
              4.      Corrugated or ribbed metal.
              5.      Fiberglass panels.

(.17)  Fences:

       A.     Fences shall comply with standards in 4.113(.07) except as follows:
              1.      Columns for the brick wall along Boeckman Road and Stafford Road shall be placed at
                     lot corners where possible.
              2.      A solid fence taller than four feet in height is not permitted within eight feet of the brick
                     wall along Boeckman Road and Stafford Road, except for fences placed on the side lot
                     line that are perpendicular to the brick wall and end at a column of the brick wall.
              3.      Height transitions for fences shall occur at fence posts.

(.18)  Residential Structures Adjacent to Schools, Parks and Public Open Spaces.

       A.     Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to ensure that development adjacent to schools
              and parks is designed to enhance those public spaces with quality design that emphasizes
              active and safe use by people and is not dominated by driveways, fences, garages, and
              parking.

       B.      Applicability. These standards apply to development that is adjacent to or faces schools and
              parks. As used here, the term adjacent includes development that is across a street or
              pedestrian connection from a school or park.

       C.     Development must utilize one or more of the following design elements:
              1.      Alley loaded garage access.
              2.      On corner lots, placement of the garage and driveway on the side street that does not
                     face the school, park, or public open space.
              3.      Recess of the garage a minimum of four feet from the front façade of the home. A
                     second story above the garage, with windows, is encouraged for this option.

       D.     Development must be oriented so that the fronts or sides of  residential structures face
              adjacent schools or parks. Rear yards and rear fences may generally not face the schools or

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.17
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              parks, unless approved through the waiver process of 4.118 upon a finding that there is no
              practicable alternative due to the size, shape or other physical constraint of the subject
              property.

(.19)—(.21)  Reserved.
(.22)  Consideration of Waivers in the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods.
       A.     Applicants for development in the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods may request
              waivers to applicable development and design standards in Section 4.127 pursuant to Section
              4.118(.03), provided the criteria in subsection B. are met. Waivers are typically applied for
              with a Stage II final plan. However, when a Stage I approval is requested prior to submission
              of a Stage II final plan in the Frog Pond East and South Neighborhoods, the applicant may
              elect to request a waiver or waivers related to standards impacting lot size or dimension,
              housing variety, the size or location of parks or open space, or the location of streets or
              pathways in conjunction with the Stage I approval, if the applicant can demonstrate each
              requested waiver would directly impact site layout. In such case, a Stage II final plan for the
              same development area may not be applied for until there is a final decision on the Stage I and
              associated waivers. Each approved Stage I waiver shall expire unless a Stage II final plan
              consistent with the approved Stage I waiver is submitted within two years.
       B.      In addition to the waiver criteria in Sections 4.118 and 4.140 and applicable Site Design
              Review standards, when reviewing a waiver for development within the Frog Pond East and
              South Neighborhoods the Development Review Board's decision shall be based on the
              following criteria, which reflects guidance in the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan:
              1.      The development enabled by the waiver is complementary and compatible with devel-
                     opment that would typically be built within the subject Urban Form Type as described
                     in Chapter 6 of the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan including structures that
                     match the relevant urban form descriptions on pages 57-59 of the Master Plan and
                     maintaining the transect of urban form shown in Figure 15. Land Use and Urban Form
                     Plan.
                     a.      In making findings regarding the waiver criteria in Section 4.140, further direc-
                            tion from Chapter 6 of the Master Plan to be considered includes, but is not
                            limited to, increasing opportunities for affordable housing choices with a focus on
                            exceeding minimum requirements for middle housing, mobility-ready units, and
                            small units as established in Table 6B; improving transitions between different
                            urban forms; and maximizing amenities available to residents and visitors (e.g.,
                            additional plazas, active recreation spaces, green focal points, and other gathering
                            opportunities).
              2.      The waiver continues to support a wide variety of housing throughout the Frog Pond
                     East and South Neighborhoods including not reducing the Minimum Number of
                     Units of any requirement in Table 6B by the greater of five units or 20 percent.
                     a.      Except as indicated in b. and c. below, the number on which the greater of five
                            units or 20 percent is calculated shall be the number as written in Table 6B and
                            shall not include any modification, combination, or summation of the number.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.18
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.127

                    b.      Where an application includes two or more adjacent tax lots within the same
                           subdistrict, the number on which the greater of  five units or 20 percent is
                           calculated shall be the sum of the requirements for those tax lots, as allowed in
                           Footnote I. of Table 6B.

                    c.      Where a requirement in Table 6B is adjusted pursuant to Subsection, 4.127 (.06)
                           C. 1., the number on which the greater of five units or 20 percent is calculated
                           shall be the adjusted number.

(.23)  Residential Neighborhood Zone—Commercial Main Street Development.

      A.     Applicability. These standards apply to the Commercial Main Street area described in
             Subsection (.07)A.1. and shown in Figure A-7.

      B.      Allowed Uses. See Subsection (.02) above.

Supp. No. 5                                           CD4:178.19
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

        C.     Development Standards. The following development standards apply to all development
                within the Commercial Main Street area of Frog Pond East.

               Table 23A. Commercial Main Street Development Standards
             STANDARD
             Front setback
                  Minimum                                                          0 ft.
                  Maximum                                                         20 ft.
             Side facing street on corner
                  Minimum                                                          0 ft.
                  Maximum                                                         10 ft.
             Side yard
                  Minimum                                                          0 ft.
                  Maximum                                                         10 ft.
             Rear setback
                  Minimum                                                          0 ft.
             Building height (stories)A

                  Minimum                                                          two
                  Maximum                                                         four
             Ground floor height minimum                           12 ft.
             Building site coverage maximum                        90%
             Minimum landscaping                                        10%
             Minimum building frontageB

                  On SW Brisband Street                                   70%
                  On SW Stafford Road                                     None
                  On other streets                                                None

                A         Second stories or higher in buildings must be usable. No false front buildings are permitted.

                B          To meet the minimum building frontage requirement, the ground level street-facing façade must meet the
                        maximum setback standard for a minimum of 70% of the lot length on SW Brisband Street.
        D.     Design Standards:

                1.      Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the design standards is to provide high quality
                        design within the Commercial Main Street area that creates a place of distinct charac-
                        ter. The design of buildings and other site features shall functionally relate to adjacent
                        streets and open spaces; shall include architectural diversity and variety in their built
                        form; shall contribute to the vitality of the street environment through incorporation of
                        storefronts, windows, and entrances facing the sidewalk; and shall minimize the visual
                        impact of off-street parking from streets.

                2.      Building and Entry Placement. Buildings shall meet the following standards:

                        a.      Development shall meet the minimum building frontage standards in Table 23A.

                        b.      At least one entrance door is required for each business, including live-work units,
                                with a ground floor frontage.

Supp. No. 5                                                      CD4:178.20
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.127

                     c.      All primary ground-floor common entrances shall be oriented to the street or a
                            public space directly facing the street, or placed at an angle up to 45 degrees from
                            an adjacent street. Primary ground-floor common entrances shall not be oriented
                            to the interior or to a parking lot.
                     d.      The primary entrance shall orient to SW Brisband Street or SW Stafford Road.
                     f.       Each entrance shall be covered, recessed, or treated with a permanent architec-
                            tural feature in such a way that weather protection is provided.
              3.      Building Setbacks. Development shall meet the minimum and maximum setback
                     standards in subsection Table 23A. No off-street vehicle parking, loading, delivery, or
                     collection service is permitted within the setback. Bicycle parking is permitted within
                     the setback.
              4.      Front Yard Setback Design. If front yard setbacks are provided, they shall be designed
                     to encourage pedestrian activity and active ground floor uses. Landscaping, water
                     quality treatment, seating areas, an arcade, or a hard-surfaced expansion of  the
                     pedestrian path must be provided between a structure and a public street or accessway.
                     If a building abuts more than one street, the required improvements shall be provided
                     on all streets. Hard-surfaced areas shall be constructed with scored concrete or modu-
                     lar paving materials. Benches and other street furnishings are encouraged.
              5.      Walkway Connection to Building Entrances. A walkway connection is required between
                     a building's primary entrance and a public street or accessway. This walkway must be at
                     least six feet wide and be paved with concrete or modular paving materials.
              6.      Parking Location and Landscape Design:
                     a.      Parking must be located to the rear of buildings.
              7.      Building Design Standards:
                     a.      General Provisions:
                            i.       The first-floor façade of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and
                                    complement pedestrian-scale interest and activity through the use of ele-
                                    ments such as windows, awnings, and other similar features.
                            ii.      Building entrances shall be clearly marked, provide weather covering, and
                                    incorporate architectural features of the building.
                            iii.     Architectural features and treatments shall not be limited to a single façade.
                                    All public-facing facades shall display a similar level of quality and archi-
                                    tectural interest, with elements such as windows, awnings, murals, a variety
                                    of exterior materials, reveals, and other similar features.
                     b.      Design Standards. All buildings shall comply with the following design standards:
                            i.       Windows:
                                    •  Building facade windows are required on all facades facing SW Brisband
                                      Street or SW Stafford Road (see Figure A-23), as follows:

                                            Ground Story facing SW Brisband Street        60% of ground floor wall area

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.21
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                Ground Story facing SW Stafford Road or                   40% of ground floor wall area
                                SW 63rd Avenue
                                Upper Stories facing SW Brisband Street, SW               20% of facade
                                Stafford Road, or SW 63rd Avenue
                                Other facades                                                      No minimum
                                   •  Window area is the aggregate area of  the glass within each window,
                                      including any interior grids, mullions, or transoms. Facade area is the
                                      aggregate area of each street-facing vertical wall plane.
                                   •  Required windows shall be clear glass and not mirrored or frosted, except
                                      for bathrooms. Clear glass within doors may be counted toward meeting
                                      the window coverage standard.
                                   •  Ground floor windows. For facades facing SW Brisband Street, SW
                                      Stafford Road, and SW 63rd Avenue elevations within the building
                                      setback shall include a minimum percentage of the ground floor wall area
                                      with windows, display areas or doorway openings. The ground floor wall
                                      area shall be measured from two feet above grade to ten feet above grade
                                      for the entire width of  the street-facing elevation. The ground floor
                                      window requirement shall be met within the ground floor wall area; glass
                                      doorway openings to ground level may be counted toward meeting the
                                      requirement.

                             Figure A-23. Window Placement and Percentage of Facade

                            ii.      Building Facades: Public-facing facades shall extend no more than 50 feet
                                   without providing at least one of the following features: (a) a variation in
                                   building materials; (b) a building off-set of at least one foot; (c) a wall area
                                   that is entirely separated from other wall areas by a projection, such as an
                                   arcade; or (d) by other design features that reflect the building's structural
                                   system (See Figure B-23). No building façade shall extend for more than
                                   300 feet without a pedestrian connection between or through the building.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.22
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

                                       Figure B-23. Building Facade Articulation

                            iii.     Weather Protection: Building facades facing SW Brisband Street shall
                                   provide weather protection as follows:
                                   •  A projecting facade element (awning, canopy, arcade, or marquee) must
                                     be provided along at least 50 percent of the façade.
                                   •  All weather protection must comply with the Oregon Structural Specialty
                                     Code in effect at the time of application for projections or encroachments
                                     into the public right-of-way.
                                   •  Weather protection shall be maintained and in good condition.
                                   •  Weather protection features shall project at least five feet from the build-
                                     ing façade.
                                   •  Marquees shall have a minimum ten-foot clearance from the bottom of
                                     the marquee to the sidewalk. Canopies and awnings shall have a mini-
                                     mum eight-foot clearance from the bottom of the awning or canopy to
                                     the sidewalk.
                                   •  The projecting façade element shall not conflict with street lights. If the
                                     projecting façade element blocks light shed from adjacent street lights,
                                     exterior lighting shall be located on the building.
                                   •  Awnings shall match the width of storefronts or window openings.
                                   •  Internally lit awnings are not permitted.
                                   •  Awnings shall be made of glass, metal, or a combination of these mate-
                                     rials. Fabric awnings are not permitted.
                            iv.     Building Materials. Plain concrete block, plain concrete, T-111 or similar
                                   sheet materials, corrugated metal, plywood, sheet press board or vinyl
                                   siding may not be used as exterior finish materials. Foundation material
                                   may be plain concrete or plain concrete block where the foundation mate-
                                   rial is not revealed for more than two feet. Use of  brick and natural
                                   materials (wood) is encouraged.
                            v.      Roofs and roof lines. Except in the case of a building entrance feature, roofs
                                   shall be designed as an extension of the primary materials used for the
                                   building and should respect the building's structural system and architec-
                                   tural style. False fronts and false roofs are not permitted.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.23
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                            vi.     Rooftop features/equipment screening:

                                    •  The following rooftop equipment does not require screening:

                                    •  Solar panels, wind generators, and green roof features;

                                    •  Equipment under two feet in height.

                                    •  Elevator mechanical equipment may extend above the height limit a
                                      maximum of 16 feet provided that the mechanical shaft is designed to
                                      match or be complementary to the architecture of the building.

                                    •  Satellite dishes and other communications equipment shall be limited to
                                      ten feet in height from the roof, shall be set back a minimum of five feet
                                      from the roof edge and screened from public view to the extent possible.

                                    •  All other roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be limited to ten feet
                                      in height, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the roof edge and
                                      screened from ground-level public view and from views from adjacent
                                      buildings.

                                    •  On all structures exceeding 35 feet in height, roofs shall have drainage
                                      systems that are designed to match or be complementary to the architec-
                                      ture of the building.

                                    •  Any external stairwells, corridors and circulation components of a build-
                                      ing shall be architecturally compatible with the overall structure, through
                                      the use of similar materials, colors, and other building elements.

                                    •  Required screening shall not be included in the building's maximum
                                      height calculation.

                            vii.    General Screening. Utility meters shall be located on the back or side of a
                                    building, screened from view from a public street to the greatest extent
                                    possible, and shall be painted a color to blend with the building façade.

                            viii.   Building projections. Building projections are allowed as follows (see Figure
                                    C-23):

                                    •  Architectural elements such as eaves and cornices may project up to one
                                      foot from the face of the building.

                                    •  Bay windows and balconies may project up to four feet from the face of
                                      the building. Balconies that project into the right-of-way shall have a
                                      minimum vertical clearance of ten feet from sidewalk grade or be mounted
                                      at the floor elevation, whichever is greater.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.24
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.127

                                            Figure C-23. Building Projections

(.24)  Special, Specific Land Use Considerations.

       A.     Frog Pond Grange Property. This special consideration pertains to an area described as: the
              western half of the area of Subdistrict E1 north of the framework street that is an extension
              of SW Frog Pond Lane and west of the framework street extending across the BPA easement.
              See Figure A-24 for locational reference. The community supports preservation, reuse, and
              adjacent uses supportive of the current Frog Pond Grange building. The Frog Pond East and
              South Master Plan identifies the long-term use of the subject area as maintaining the existing
              civic/meeting/event space use or substantially similar use with surrounding open space. Any
              substantial change of use shall require an amendment to the Frog Pond East and South
              Master Plan. Preservation of the existing building, substantially similar in design to that
              existing as of the 2022 adoption of the Frog Pond East and South Master Plan, is required on
              the site unless approved by the Development Review Board with findings providing substan-
              tial evidence that preservation is not feasible due to structural issues with the building that are
              not feasible, either economically or technically, to repair.

Supp. No. 5                                             CD4:178.25
§ 4.127                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                         Figure A-24

       B.      Treed area on south side of SW Kahle Road. This special consideration pertains to an area
              described as a treed area south of SW Kahle Road between Subdistricts E2 and E3 and
              bounded on both side by creeks. See Figure B-24 for locational reference. An applicant may
              request the subject area not be included in the SROZ based on findings made, as part of a
              SROZ Map Verification pursuant to Section 4.139.05, that the area does not meet the
              standard to be included in the SROZ. If it is found the area is not to be in the SROZ the
              Urban Form Type 3 shall apply. There is no minimum unit count and the area would not be
              considered part of a subdistrict. There would be no housing variety requirement applied.

                                                         Figure B-24

(Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exhs. A, B), 12-2-2024)

Supp. No. 5                                            CD4:178.26
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.131

Section  4.131.  PDC—Planned Development Commercial Zone.

The requirements of a PDC Zone shall be governed by Section 4.140, Planned Development Regula-
tions, and as otherwise set forth in this Code.
       (.01)  The following shall apply to any PDC zone:
              A.     Uses that are typically permitted:
                     1.      Retail business, goods and sales.
                     2.      Wholesale showrooms.
                     3.      Offices and clinics.
                     4.      Service establishments.
                     5.      Any use allowed in a PDR Zone or PDI Zone, provided the majority of the total
                             ground floor area is commercial, or any other commercial uses provided that any
                             such use is compatible with the surrounding uses and is planned and developed in
                             a manner consistent with the purposes and objectives of Section 4.140. However,
                             the uses listed as prohibited below shall not be permitted.
                     6.      Accessory uses, buildings, and structures customarily incidental to any of the
                             aforesaid principal permitted uses.
                     7.      Temporary buildings or structures for uses incidental to construction work,
                             which buildings or structures shall be removed upon completion or abandonment
                             of the construction work.
                     8.      Churches.
                     9.      Those uses that are listed as typically permitted in Section 4.131.05(.03), as well as
                             the following additional uses when conducted entirely within enclosed buildings:
                             a.      Automotive machine shops
                             b.      Automotive detail shops
                             c.      Repair shops for:
                                    i.       electronics;
                                    ii.      boats;
                                    iii.     appliances;
                                    iv.     light equipment;
                                    v.      yard equipment;
                                    vi.     other related types of repair shops.
                             d.      Fabrication shops including:
                                    i.       cabinets;
                                    ii.      sheet metal;
                                    iii.     counter tops;
                                    iv.     closet systems;
                                    v.      other related types of work.
                             e.      Marine equipment—supply and repair

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.27
§ 4.131                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       (.02)  Prohibited uses:
              A.     No body/fender repair shops shall be permitted unless all operations are conducted
                     entirely within enclosed buildings and meet the performance standards of Section
                     4.135(.05). The storage and parking of damaged vehicles shall be screened to assure
                     that they are not visible off-site.
              B.      No used car sales shall be permitted, except in conjunction with new car dealerships
                     within enclosed buildings.
              C.     No wrecking yards shall be permitted.
              D.     Retail operations south of Boeckman Road and having more than 50,000 square feet of
                     ground floor building area shall only be permitted where it is demonstrated to the

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:178.28
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.132

                   satisfactionof theDevelopmentReviewBoardthatthefollowingstandardswillbemet.
                   For purposes of these standards, service activities, offices, and other non-retail com-
                   mercial ventures shall not be considered to be "retail operations."
                   1.      That the majority of  the customers for the proposed use can reasonably be
                          expectedtocomefromnofurtherthanfivemilesfromtheproposeddevelopment
                          site; and
                   2.      That the site design, architecture, landscaping, and pedestrian amenities are
                          compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
             E.     Any use that violates the performance standards of Section 4.135(.05), other than
                   4.135(.05)(M.)(3.).
      (.03)  Blockandaccessstandards:
             1.      TheDevelopmentReviewBoardshalldetermineappropriateconditionsof approvalto
                   assure that adequate connectivity results for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicle
                   drivers.Considerationshallbegiventotheuseof publictransitasameansof meeting
                   access needs.
             2.      Where a residential development, or mixed-use development including residential
                   development,isproposedinaPDCzone,theDevelopmentReviewBoardshallassure
                   thatadequateconnectivityisprovidedmeetingthestandardsof Metro'sUrbanGrowth
                   Management Functional Plan.
             3.      Where a residential development, or mixed-use development including residential
                   development,isproposedinaPDCzone,andtheapplicationincludesalanddivision,
                   the following standards shall be applied:
                   a.     Maximumspacingbetweenstreetsforlocalaccess:530feet,unlesswaivedbythe
                          Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as railroads, free-
                          ways, existing buildings, topographic variations, or designated Significant Re-
                          source Overlay Zone areas will prevent street extensions meeting this standard.
                   b.     Maximum block length without pedestrian and bicycle crossing: 330 feet, unless
                          waived by the Development Review Board upon finding that barriers such as
                          railroads, freeways, existing buildings, topographic variations, or designated
                          Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas will prevent pedestrian and bicycle
                          facility extensions meeting this standard.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 835, 5-6-2019)

Section  4.132. Town Center Zone.
(.01)  The Town Center (TC) Zone applies to lands within the Town Center Comprehensive Plan Map
      designation. The TC Zone is a Planned Development Zone, subject to applicable Planned Devel-
      opmentregulations(seeSection4.140and4.118).Whereconflictsoccurbetweenthesestandards
      andotherDevelopmentCoderegulationsorotherordinances,theprovisionsof thisChaptershall
      apply.
      The purposes of the TC Zone are to:
      A.     Implement the Town Center policies and implementation measures of the Comprehensive
             Plan.

                                                      CD4:179
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      B.      Implement the Wilsonville Town Center Plan recommendations for the Town Center Com-
             prehensive Plan Map designation.

      C.     Createavibrant,walkabledestinationthatinspirespeopletosocialize,shop,live,andwork.

      D.     Support future development that transforms Town Center into the heart of Wilsonville.

      E.     Foster active parks, civic spaces, and amenities that provide year-round, compelling experi-
             ences.

      F.      Create a development pattern where Wilsonville residents and visitors come for shopping,
             dining, culture, and entertainment.

             Sub-districts. The TC Zone includes four sub-districts (Figure 1):
             a.     MainStreet. A walkable and lively main street with a mix of active uses and three- to
                    four-story buildings through the heart of Town Center along Parkway Avenue, which
                    would extend south past Town Center Park to Wilsonville Road.

             b.     Neighborhood-Mixed Use. Development would be primarily small-scale mixed-use,
                    two-tothree-storydevelopment,withneighborhood-servingcommercialbusinessesor
                    townhomesadjacenttoTownCenterLoopEastandtheexistingresidentialneighbor-
                    hoods. Neighborhood-mixed use provides a transition from single-family neighbor-
                    hoods east of Town Center Loop East to the central portions of Town Center.

             c.     MixedUse. A variety of two- to four-story buildings throughout Town Center would
                    providethemixof residential,commercialandofficeusesthecommunityislookingto
                    haveinTownCenter.ModerateactivitynearWilsonvilleRoadwouldbecommercially
                    focused while the areas near Town Center Park would include more residential and
                    mixed-use buildings.
             d.     Commercial-MixedUse.Allowingtallerbuildings,uptofivestories,alongI-5andnear
                    thefuturebike/pedestrianbridgelanding,wouldimproveTownCenter'svisibility,help
                    create a sense of  place, and support the increased level of  activity and economic
                    vibrancy desired by community members, including additional employment opportu-
                    nities,entertainment,andhospitalityservices.Asproposed,residentialusesinthisarea
                    would be required to be buffered from I-5 by non-residential buildings.
                    If a development site includes more than one sub-district, and the development of
                    different portions of the parcel under different sub-districts is not feasible due to site
                    sizeorothersiteconstraintsnotrelatedtoproposeduses,theapplicantmayfollowthe
                    standards for either sub-district within 50 feet of  the sub-district boundary. The
                    selection and application of the sub-district standards must provide for compatibility
                    with any existing or approved development designed pursuant to the TC Zone stan-
                    dardsandresultinbuildingorientationconsistentwiththebuildingandstreetfrontage
                    requirements in Subsection 4.132(.06)B.

(.02)  UsespermittedanywhereintheTCZone:

      A.     Open space.

                                                       CD4:180
                           PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.132

B.      Multiple-family Dwelling Units, except in areas immediately adjacent to I-5 as noted in
       Subsection [4.132](.03)A. below within the Commercial-Mixed Use District.

C.     Public or private parks, playgrounds, recreational and community buildings and uses.

D.     Commercial recreation.

E.     Religious institutions.

F.      Retail sales and service of retail products, under a footprint of 30,000 square feet per use.

G.     Office, including medical facilities.

H.     Personal and professional services.

I.      Child and/or day care.

J.       Food service (e.g. restaurants, food carts, food cart pods).

K.     Beverage service (e.g. cafes, brewpubs, bars).

L.     Any of the above in mixed-use buildings.

                                  Figure 1. Town Center Sub-Districts

                                                   CD4:181
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  PermittedandProhibitedusesinspecificsub-districts.Figure1,LandUseSub-Districts,illustrates
      subareasof theTownCenterwherecertainregulationsapply.Belowareuse-relatedregulationsfor
      the sub-districts.

      A.    Commercial-MixedUse(C-MU):

             1.      Additional permitted uses—Commercial recreation with outdoor facilities (e.g. cart
                    track);single-usercommercialorretail(e.g.grocerystoreorretailestablishment)may
                    exceed30,000squarefeetif locatedonmorethanonestoryof amulti-storybuilding;
                    cinemas.
             2.      Multiple-family dwelling units are prohibited immediately adjacent to I-5. Multiple-
                    family development must be buffered from I-5 by non-residential building(s).

      B.    Commercial-MixedUse(C-MU):
             3.      Additional permitted uses—Commercial recreation with outdoor facilities (e.g. cart
                    track);single-usercommercialorretail(e.g.grocerystoreorretailestablishment)may
                    exceed30,000squarefeetif locatedonmorethanonestoryof amulti-storybuilding;
                    cinemas.

             4.      Multiple-family dwelling units are prohibited immediately adjacent to I-5. Multiple-
                    family development must be buffered from I-5 by non-residential building(s).

             5.      Uses with drive-through facilities - New uses with drive-through facilities (e.g. fast
                    food,banks,carwash)arepermittedintheC-MUsub-district,providedthattheymeet
                    design and development standards for the TC Zone. Existing drive-through uses and
                    facilities may be continued consistent with Section 4.189.

      C.    MainStreet(MS):
             1.      Uses with drive-through facilities - New uses with drive-through facilities (e.g. fast
                    food,banks,carwash)areprohibited.Existingdrive-throughusesandfacilitiesmaybe
                    continued consistent with Section 4.189. In the MS sub-district, a change in use is
                    prohibited for new drive-through uses.

      D.    MixedUse(MU):

             1.      Additional permitted uses—Single-user commercial or retail (e.g. grocery store or
                    retailestablishment)mayexceed30,000squarefeetif locatedonmorethanonestoryof
                    a multi-story building.

             2.      Uses with drive-through facilities—New uses with drive-through facilities (e.g. fast
                    food, banks, car wash) are permitted in the MU sub-district, provided that they meet
                    design and development standards for the TC Zone. Existing drive-through uses and
                    facilities may be continued consistent with Section 4.189.

      E.    NeighborhoodMixedUse(N-MU):

             1.      Uses with drive-through facilities—New uses with drive-through facilities (e.g. fast
                    food,banks,carwash),areprohibited.Existingdrive-throughusesandfacilitiesmaybe

                                                       CD4:182
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

                    continued consistent with Section 4.189. In the N-MU sub-district, a change in use is
                    permitted if redeveloping an existing drive-through use with another drive-through
                    use, consistent with the other standards of Section 4.189.

(.04)  ConsistencywithStreetNetworkandMulti-modalNetwork:

      A.     All development will be consistent with the Street Network and Multi-modal Network,
             showninFigures2and3.Streetandmulti-modalfacilitylocationsareapproximateandwill
             be finalized as part of the development review process. The purpose of these plans are to
             support the creation of  a highly connected and walkable Town Center where there are
             options for travel. The Development Review Board (DRB) may approve variations from
             Figures 2 and/or 3, if:

             1.      Existing development restricts the connection from being developed;

             2.      Existingnaturalresourcesand/oropenspacewouldbeadverselyaffectedbyconstruc-
                    tion of the facility and mitigation of those impacts is not feasible.

      B.      If  a street or other multimodal connection varies from Figures 2 and/or 3, equivalent
             connectivityandmulti-modaltraveloptionsshallbeprovidedasdeterminedinaTranspor-
             tation Impact Analysis prepared per Section 4.140 and approved by the City Engineer.

      C.     All development shall provide transportation facilities consistent with the cross-sections in
             the Wilsonville Town Center Plan and applicable provisions of the Wilsonville Transporta-
             tion System Plan subject to variations approved by the City Engineer.

      D.     All franchise utilities shall be located underground within the public sidewalk.

                                                       CD4:183
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                     Figure 2. Street Network

                                                                CD4:184
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.132

                                         Figure 3. Multimodal Network

(.05)  ConsistencywithOpenSpaceNetwork:

      A.     All development will be consistent with the Open Space Network, shown in Figure 4. The
             openspacesizesandlocationsonFigure4areapproximateandwillbefinalizedaspartof the
             developmentreviewprocess.Thepurposeof theplanistocreateopenspacesthatarelinked
             and serve as attractive amenities for Town Center. The Development Review Board may
             approvevariationsfromFigure4if neededtoaccommodateexistingdevelopmentorphysical
             constraints, and/or, preserve natural resources and open space. If an open space is varied,
             equivalent open space and open space linkage shall be provided.

      B.      The Development Review Board may specify the method of assuring the long-term protec-
             tion and maintenance of open space and/or recreational areas. Where such protection or
             maintenance are the responsibility of a private party or homeowners' association, the City
             Attorney shall review any pertinent bylaws, covenants or agreements prior to recordation.

                                                     CD4:185
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                           Figure 4. Open Space Network

(.06)  DesignandDevelopmentStandards:

      A.    PurposeandIntent. The purpose of the design standards is to:

             1.      Provide high quality design in new development and redevelopment that promotes a
                    sense of community identity and implements the Wilsonville Town Center Vision.

             2.      Provideawell-definedpedestrian,bicycleandvehicularnetwork,goodconnectionsto
                    adjacent land uses and direct connections to transit stops.

             3.      Provide quality and usable open space, increase street tree canopy, and create transi-
                    tions between land uses.

             4.      Providesustainabledevelopmentthroughtheadaptivereuseof existingbuildingsand
                    increase the use of low-impact development best practices.

             5.      AlldevelopmentshallfollowthesestandardsexceptaspermittedinSubsection4.132(.06)
                    D.

      B.    Building/Street Frontage Requirements. Building and street frontage requirements in this
             section are intended to create an active pedestrian environment through sidewalk-facing
             ground floors and entryways with protection from the elements for pedestrians.

                                                        CD4:186
                                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                           § 4.132

Table 1. Building/Frontage Design Standards.
Streettype                   Main Street                 Local Roads             Collectors                 Arterial                    Multi-Use Paths
                                                       Provides localac-                                Provides connec-
                                                       cessto adjacent         Provides capacity        tivity to regional
                                                       developmentwith         to accommodate           system focused on        Provides bicycle, and
                           Provides pedestrian-        pedestrian design       multimodaltrans-         movingpeople.            pedestrian connec-
Objective                  oriented andactive          focus.                  portationaccess          Access from adja-        tivity travel within
                           building frontage on        Local roads             andconnectivity          centmultimodal           TownCenter and
                           street.                     should alsopro-         to regional con-         networks is fo-          connections to larger
                                                       videaccessto            nections.                cused at signalized      bike/ped system.
                                                       parking andser-                                  intersections.
                                                       vice entrances.
                           Required. Separated         Required. Sepa-         Required. Sepa-          Required. Sepa-
                           from curb by plant-         rated from curb         rated from curb          rated from curb
Sidewalks                  ing strip, tree wells,      by planting strip,      by planting strip,       by planting strip,       N/A
                           or rain gardens.            tree wells, or rain     tree wells, or rain      tree wells, or rain
                                                       gardens.                gardens.                 gardens.
Sidewalk width(curb        12 feet, plus optional      12—14feet, de-
to                         setbacks.                   pending on local        12—13.5 feet (per        13.5—16.5 feet           Varies-minimum 12
building) [1]              10 feetfronting             streetoption.           TSP).                    (perTSP).                feet.
                           TownCenter Park.
                           Streettrees and             Streettrees and
                           plantings, including        plantings, includ-
Landscapingtype            rain gardens, roof-         ing rain gardens,       See Section4.176.   See Section4.176.   See Section4.176.
                           top gardens, plazas.        rooftopgardens,
                                                       plazas.
                                                       Dependent on
                                                       localroaddesign
                                                       (see cross section
                           Parallel or diagonal        options). Parallel
On-street                  parking required.           parking on both
parking                    Parkletsandbicycle          sides, or diagonal      Optional                  Prohibited                N/A
                           parking permitted in        parking on one
                           street[2].                  side, depending on
                                                       ROW availability
                                                       andstreetcross-
                                                       section.
Number of lanes          Two                              Two                          Two                          Three to five            N/A
                           See Figure 3.
                           One-way buffered
                           bike lanes required
                           north of TownCen-                                   Buffered, one-way,
                           terPark.                                            exceptwhere two-
Bicyclefacilities          Two-way cycletrack          Variesby local          way cycletrack is        Buffered, one way.  N/A
                           adjacentto Town             streetoption.           recommended(see
                           Center Park andon                                   Figure 3).
                           CourtsideDrive
                           from Park Place to
                           TownCenter Loop
                           East.

                                                                      CD4:187
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Table 1. Building/Frontage Design Standards.
Streettype                   Main Street                 Local Roads             Collectors                 Arterial                    Multi-Use Paths
Minimum% of                 Minimum 70%of
building alongstreet        buildings facing            Minimum 50%of
frontage                    main street.Build-          building facing a
(see Figures 5.A            ingsto be placed at         localstreet. Build-      Minimum 50%        Minimum 50%        N/A
through5.Dfor typi-         corners with pri-           ingsto be placed
calsite                     mary building access        at corners.
designs)                    at or within 20 feet
                            of the corner.
                                                        On streetwhen
                                                        allowed, behind or
                                                        to the sideof
                            On street,behind            building.                To the back or           To the back or
                            building (surface or        Off streetparking        sideof building.         sideof building.
Location of parking         structured, above or        is not permitted         Off-streetparking        Off-streetparking       N/A
                            belowgrade)), or at         alongmain street         prohibited at cor-       prohibited at cor-
                            shared central loca-        frontage.                ners of public           ners of public
                            tion.                       Off-streetparking        streets.                 streets.
                                                        prohibited at cor-
                                                        ners of public
                                                        streets.
                            Parking accesspro-
                            vided vialocal
                            street,alley, or
                            midblock crossing.
                            Alleys must be lo-                                                            Notpermitted.
                            cated more than 100         Parking access                                    Access to be pro-
                            feetfrom another            provided vialocal        Parking access           vided at signalized
Parkingaccess               road or accesspoint.        accessstreetor           provided vialocal        intersections and       N/A
                            Shared accessis en-         alley.                   street.                  interior circula-
                            couraged.Parking                                                              tionsystem.
                            accessis restricted
                            on north/south main
                            streetunless no
                            otheraccessis feasi-
                            ble.

                                                                       CD4:188
                                       PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                       § 4.132

Table 1. Building/Frontage Design Standards.
Streettype                   Main Street                 Local Roads             Collectors                 Arterial                    Multi-Use Paths
Driveway
spacing                   100 ft. min                   100 ft. min               100 ft. min               N/A                          N/A
standards
                                                    Maximum block
                                                    lengthis 400 ft.
                          Maximum block             Themaximum
                          lengthis 400 ft. The      distance to a pe-
                          maximum distance          destrian mid-
                          to a pedestrian mid-      block crossing
Block length              block crossing shall      shallbe 250 ft. to      N/A                          N/A                          N/A
                          be 250 ft. Maximum        providepedestrian
                          mid-block crossing        andparking ac-
                          width up to 20 ft.        cess. Maximum
                                                    mid-block cross-
                                                    ing width up to 30
                                                    ft.
Typical vehiclespeed   20—25mph                 20—25mph             25—30mph             25—35mph             N/A

               [1]     Sidewalkwidthincludeslandscapingarea.Treewellsshallincluderootbarriers,theuse
                        of  structural soils, soil cells, or other means to minimize impacts to sidewalks or
                        roadway from root intrusion.

               [2]     A maximum of two parklets are permitted per block, per side of street.

                                         Figure 5.A. Building Placement and Location
                                       of Parking, Main Street Intersection (typical)

                                                                   CD4:189
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                       Figure 5.B. Building Placement and Location of Parking, Main
                                      Street/Local Street Intersection (typical)

                       Figure 5.C. Building Placement and Location of Parking, Local
                                      Street/Local Street Intersection (typical)

                                                           CD4:190
                                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                           § 4.132

                            Figure5.D.BuildingPlacementandLocationof Parking,Arterial/
                                             Collector/Local Street frontage (typical)

        C.    Development Standards. Development standards apply to all new development within the
                 Town Center boundary.

             Table 2. Town Center Development Standards [1]
                                                                                                  Town Center
             STANDARD                                                                  SUB-DISTRICT
                                                                   MSD                N-MU                 MU                 C-MU
             Front setback
                 Minimum                                       0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.
                 Maximum [2]                                20 ft.                 20 ft.                 20 ft.                 10 ft.
             Side facing street on corner and through lots
                 Minimum                                       0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.
                 Maximum [2]                                10 ft.                 10 ft.                 10 ft.                 10 ft.
             Side yard
                 Minimum                                       0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.
                 Maximum [2]                                10 ft.                 10 ft.                 10 ft.                 10 ft.
             Rear setback
                 Minimum                                       0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.                   0 ft.
                 Maximum                                     20 ft.                 20 ft.                 20 ft.                 20 ft.
             Building height (stories) [3]
                 Minimum                                       two                    two                    two                    two
                 Maximum (stories/feet) [4]           four                  three                  four                    five
             Groundfloorheightminimum                               15 ft.                 12 ft.                 12 ft.                 15 ft.
             [5]

Supp. No. 2                                                            CD4:191
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

           Table 2. Town Center Development Standards [1]
                                                                                  Town Center
           STANDARD                                                                  SUB-DISTRICT
                                                        MSD                N-MU                 MU                 C-MU
           Ground floor uses                    Mixed-use                    N/A                   N/A                   N/A
                                                  buildings    re-
                                                  quired  within
                                                  200 feet of the
                                                  Park      Place/
                                                  Courtside
                                                  Drive intersec-
                                                         tion.
           Building site coverage maxi-                  90%                   75%                   90%                   90%
           mum
           Minimum landscaping                      10%                   15%                   10%                   10%
           Minimum building frontage             70%                   25%                   50%                   50%
           Residential density (units per acre)
              Minimum [6]                                   40                      16                      40                      40
              Maximum                                     None                   40                   None                 None
              [1]     Thistabledoesnotapplytoexistingdevelopment.Allnewbuildingsinthedistrictmust
                     meet these development standards.
              [2]     For commercial development, the maximum front and street side yard setback is ten
                     feet.Formixed-useandresidentialonlydevelopment,themaximumfrontsetbackis20
                     feet.Frontsetbacksarepermittedprovidedtheyareusedforseatingorotherusesthat
                     encourage pedestrian activity and active ground floor uses. A variety of  building
                     setbacks are encouraged.
              [3]     Second stories or higher in buildings must be useable. No false front buildings are
                     permitted.
              [4]     Within the MSD, MU and C-MU sub-districts, the maximum number of building
                     stories may be increased by one story if a minimum of 25 percent of the units of the
                     bonusfloorareaareaffordable,withrentalrates/mortgagerestrictionsforaminimum
                     of tenyears,tohouseholdsearningatorbelow80percentof medianfamilyincomeof
                     Wilsonville.
              [5]     This standard does not apply to residential only buildings.
              [6]     Minimum residential density applies to residential-only development. There is no
                     minimum residential density for mixed-use development.
       D.    Waivers to Development Standards. Development standards apply to all new development
              within the Town Center boundary.
              TheDevelopmentReviewBoard(DRB)mayapprovewaiverstothesizeof thegroundfloor
              of abuildingfloorplateand/orthenumberof storiesof abuildingwithintheMUandC-MU

Supp. No. 2                                                CD4:192
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

      sub-districts,consistentwiththeprovisionsof Section4.118(.03)if oneitemfromeachof the
      twofollowingmenusaremetinamannertoclearlygosubstantiallyaboveandbeyondCode
      requirements and typical building and site design to create a sense of place and mitigate
      negative impacts of the project related to the reason for the waiver. Items chosen from the
      menus shall account for need based on adjacent sites or the surrounding area:

      MenuOne:

      1.      Public amenities, such as a plaza or other community gathering space, incorporated
             intothebuildingdesign.Publicplazaorothergatheringspaceslocatedinaprominent,
             visible location adjacent to a public street and include movable furniture that is
             functional and visually interesting.

      2.      Public community meeting space provided within the building.

      3.      Provision of ground floor facades that include additional supporting storefronts. The
             primary entrance of all businesses shall be located on the primary street frontage.

      4.      Provisionof incubatorspaceonsite,eitherwithinoradjacenttothedevelopmentthat
             provides below market lease rates for small businesses.

      5.      Provisionof affordablehousingonthedevelopmentsite,consistentwiththeprovisions
             of Table 2, footnote 4.

      MenuTwo:

      1.      Innovativebuildingtechniques,suchasrainwaterharvesting,graywatersystems,green
             roofs,orotherenvironmentalsystems,shallbeincorporatedintothebuildingdesignto
             significantly reduce impact to the environment.

      2.      Building architecture that creates a distinctive community landmark exemplifying the
             preferred materials and form for Town Center described in Subsection 4.132(.06)M.
             and discussed in the Town Center Plan.

      3.      Pedestrian-oriented and creative lighting incorporated into landscape features and
             plazas and/or interior window retail displays that are lit at night.

      4.      Achievementof LEEDcertification,EarthAdvantage,oranotherrecognizedenviron-
             mental certification.

      5.      Installationof publicart,consistentwiththeprovisionsof Subsection4.132(.06)K.for
             art within plaza areas.

E.    BuildingPlacement. Buildings shall meet the following standards:

      1.      Main Streets and Local Streets. Where parcels are bounded by a main street and
             perpendicular street, buildings shall be located at the street intersection. For parcels
             with frontage only on one street or if  a building is already located at the street
             intersection,thenewbuildingshallbelocatedimmediatelyadjacenttoexistingbuilding
             tocreateacontinuousbuildingfaçadewithadjacentbuildings.Streetfrontagerequire-
             ments for main street are a minimum of 70 percent of the lot frontage. Off-street

                                                CD4:193
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    parkingshallbelocatedbehindbuildingsfrontingmainstreet,eitheronsurfaceortuck
                    under lot, parking structure, or at a central off-site parking facility located within the
                    TC boundary.
             2.      If  a parcel fronts two or more different street design classifications, the primary
                    buildingentranceshallfrontthefollowinginorderof priority:mainstreet,localstreet,
                    collector street.
             3.      Minimum building frontage requirements for a local street shall be 25 percent if the
                    development also fronts main street.
             4.      Minimum building frontage requirements for a local street shall be 50 percent if the
                    development fronts another local street.
             5.      For parcels that do not front a main street or a local street, the minimum building
                    frontage shall occupy a minimum 50 percent of the lot frontage.
             6.      The Development Review Board may approve variations from building placement
                    standards if existing development, physical constraints, or site circulation and access
                    are infeasible. If the Development Review Board determines that a variation from
                    building placement standards is required, building placement should be prioritized as
                    follows:
                    a.      If  the development is adjacent to main street, the primary frontage of  the
                           buildingshallremainonmainstreetwithvariationfromthisstandardoccurring
                           on a side street.
                    b.      If thedevelopmentisadjacenttothemainstreets(e.g.ParkPlaceandCourtside
                           Drive) the primary frontage shall be on Park Place with the variation occurring
                           on Courtside Drive.
                    c.      If thedevelopmentisadjacenttotwolocalstreets,theprimaryfrontageshallbe
                           on the north/south local street with the variation occurring on east/west local
                           street.
      F.     BuildingSetbacks. The minimum building setback from public street rights-of-way shall be
             zerofeet;themaximumbuildingsetbackshallbe20feetforMSDandN-MUdistricts.The
             maximum setback shall be ten feet for all other districts. No off-street vehicle parking or
             loading is permitted within the setback. Bicycle parking is permitted with in the setback.

      G.    FrontYardSetbackDesign. Landscaping, water quality treatment, seating areas, an arcade,
             or a hard-surfaced expansion of the pedestrian path must be provided between a structure
             and a public street or accessway. If a building abuts more than one street, the required
             improvementsshallbeprovidedonallstreets.Hard-surfacedareasshallbeconstructedwith
             scored concrete or modular paving materials. Benches and other street furnishings are
             encouraged.
      H.    Walkway Connection to Building Entrances. A walkway connection is required between a
             building's entrance and a public street or accessway. This walkway must be at least six feet
             wideandbepavedwithconcreteormodularpavingmaterials.Buildingentrancesatacorner
             adjacent to a public street intersection are encouraged.

                                                        CD4:194
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.132

I.     ParkingLocationandLandscapeDesign:

      1.      Parkingforbuildingsadjacenttopublicstreetrights-of-waymustbelocatedtotheside
             orrearof newlyconstructedbuildings,exceptforbuildingsfrontingmainstreet,where
             parking must be located behind the building, either surface, tuck under or structured
             (aboveorbelowgrade).Forlocationswhereparkingmaybelocatedtothesideof the
             building, parking is limited to 50 percent of the street frontage and must be behind a
             landscaped area per Section 4.176.

      2.      Withinoff-streetparkinglots,allparkingspaces,exceptforthosedesignatedforADA
             accessiblespaceordeliveries,shallbesharedspaces.Designationforindividualusesis
             not permitted.

      3.      Within off-street parking lots, time limitations may be placed on parking spaces to
             encourage parking turnover. This includes time limitations to pickup and drop off of
             goods from area businesses (e.g. drycleaner, bank ATM etc.).

J.     Parking Garages and Off-street Parking Access. Parking garages must meet all building
      standardsidentifiedwithinthissection.Off streetaccesstoaparkinglotorgarageshouldbe
      located to minimize conflicts with pedestrians and must be provided from an alley or local
      street.

K.    PlazaAreas. The following plaza design standards are intended to enhance the overall site
      layout and ensure that plaza areas are designed as an accessible amenity.

      1.      Plaza space shall be required when a mixed-use or commercial development or rede-
             velopmentinvolvesagrosssiteareagreaterthantwoacres.Whenaplazaisrequiredas
             apercentageof theoverallrequiredopenspacetheplazaspaceshallincorporateatleast
             three of the following elements:
             a.      Oneseatingspaceisprovidedforevery250squarefeetof plazaareaand/orpublic
                   space. The seating space requirement may be met by providing benches, chairs,
                   and/orseat-walls.Areasactivelyusedforpublicoutdoorcafesareexemptedfrom
                   thecalculationintheseatingarearequirement.Remainingplazaareasmustmeet
                   the seating requirement.
             b.      Structuressuchaspergolas,canopies,awnings,arcades,orothersimilarelements
                   to provide shade and rain coverage. Structures should provide coverage for
                   year-round use of the plaza.
             c.      Notwithstandingtreesrequiredtosatisfytheopenspacerequirement,additional
                   treesareprovidedatarateof onetreeper800squarefeetof plazaorpublicspace
                   area.
             d.      Water features.

             e.      Publicart.Publicartthatisproposedorprovidedmustsatisfyallof thefollowing
                   requirements:
                   i.       The art must be designed and produced by a professional artist;

                                               CD4:195
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                           ii.      The art must relate in terms of  scale, material, form and content to
                                  immediate and adjacent buildings and architecture, landscaping or other
                                  settings so as to complement the site and its surroundings;
                           iii.     The art must demonstrate excellence in craftsmanship, originality in con-
                                  ception, and integrity of materials. Interactive art is encouraged;
                           iv.     Minimalmaintenancemustbeadequateforpreservingthelong-terminteg-
                                  rityandenjoymentof theart,asevidencedbyamaintenanceplansubmit-
                                  ted with the public art proposal;
                           v.      Art in private construction projects must be maintained by the property
                                  ownerinamanneracceptabletotheCityinaccordancewithamaintenance
                                  plan submitted with the art proposal;
                           vi.     The art must meet all applicable building code requirements.
                           vii.    The art must be accompanied by an identifying plaque that features the
                                  artist's name, artwork title and date of completion. This plaque must be
                                  made of a durable material and be installed permanently near the art.
                    f.       Activity areas including but not limited to outdoor cafes, retail spaces, and/or
                           programmed spaces that accommodate entertainment, meetings, educational
                           activities, and play areas.
                    g.      Pedestrian-scale wayfinding.
             2.      Plaza areas shall be visible and accessible from adjacent streets or pedestrian areas. A
                    minimumof 75percentof theplazafrontageshallprovidedirectunobstructedaccess
                    from adjacent streets.
             3.      Stormwatermanagementfacilitiesshallbeintegratedintotheplazadesignandusedas
                    an amenity to the greatest extent possible.
             4.      Nolessthan20percentormorethan60percentof theplazaareashallbeutilizedfor
                    planted landscaping, including stormwater detention areas. All other areas shall be
                    composed of hardscaping.
             5.      The minimum size of a plaza shall be 2,000 square feet.
             6.      Litterreceptaclesshallbeprovidedataminimumof fourcubicfeetof capacityper800
                    square feet of open plaza space.
      L.    DriveThroughFacilities.Adrive-throughfacilityshallbesubjecttothefollowingstandards:
             1.      Shall only be permitted if the building also includes indoor seating.
             2.      Shall not be permitted on parcels with frontage on a main street.
             3.      Alltrafficqueuingusingthedrivethroughfacilitiesshallbeaccommodatedonsiteand
                    shall not conflict with bicycle and pedestrian mobility adjacent to the site.
             4.      A drive-through lane shall not be located in the area between a building and a public
                    street and the drive-through windows shall not face a public street.
             5.      Inadditiontostandardsfordrivethroughs,buildingswithdrive-throughfacilitiesshall
                    also meet standards for primary building access (Subsection 4.132(.06)M.2.h.).

                                                        CD4:196
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.132

      6.      Drive-through facilities shall be clearly marked with signage to avoid conflict with on
             site and adjacent pedestrian and bicycle facilities.

       Figure 6. Drive Through Facilities in Town Center, if not enclosed in a structure
                                                (typical)

M.   BuildingDesignStandards:

      1.     GeneralProvisions:

             a.      The first-floor façade of all buildings, including structured parking facilities,
                    shall be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale interest and
                    activitythroughtheuseof elementssuchaswindows,awnings,andothersimilar
                    features.

             b.      Buildingentrancesshallbeclearlymarked,provideweathercovering,andincor-
                    porate architectural features of the building.

             c.      Architectural features and treatments shall not be limited to a single façade. All
                    visiblesidesof abuildingfromthestreet,whetherviewedfrompublicorprivate
                    property, shall display a similar level of quality and architectural interest, with
                    elements such as windows, awnings, murals, a variety of  exterior materials,
                    reveals, and other similar features.

                                                 CD4:197
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    d.      Greenbuildingtechniquesareencouraged,whichcouldincludetheuseof green
                           roofs, gray water and water harvesting, and/or LEED certification of buildings.
             2.     DesignStandards:
                    [a.]    All buildings, including parking garages, shall comply with the following design
                           standards.Buildingfacadewindowsarerequiredonallstreet-facingfacades(see
                           Figure 7), as follows:

                               Ground Story: Mixed Use and Non-Residential       60% of facade
                               Upper Stories: Mixed Use                                           30% of facade
                               Ground Story: Residential Only                                 30% of facade
                           i.       Window area is the aggregate area of  the glass within each window,
                                  including any interior grids, mullions, or transoms. Facade area is the
                                  aggregate area of each street-facing vertical wall plane.
                           ii.      Required windows shall be clear glass and not mirrored or frosted, except
                                  forbathrooms.Clearglasswithindoorsmaybecountedtowardmeetingthe
                                  window coverage standard.
                           iii.    Groundfloorwindows. All street-facing elevations within the building set-
                                  back (zero to 20 feet) along public streets shall include a minimum of 60
                                  percent of  the ground floor wall area with windows, display areas or
                                  doorwayopenings.Thegroundfloorwallareashallbemeasuredfromtwo
                                  feet above grade to ten feet above grade for the entire width of the street-
                                  facingelevation.Thegroundfloorwindowrequirementshallbemetwithin
                                  thegroundfloorwallareaandforglassdoorwayopeningstogroundlevel.
                                  Upto50percentof thegroundfloorwindowrequirementmaybemetonan
                                  adjoiningelevationaslongastheentirerequirementislocatedatabuilding
                                  corner.
                           iv.     Street-facingfacadesthatcontainvehicleparking,suchasaparkingstruc-
                                  ture,donothavetoprovidewindowsbutshallprovidefacadeopeningsthat
                                  meet the minimum required window area. If required facade openings do
                                  notcontainglass,theymaycontainarchitecturalelementsthatarenomore
                                  than 30 percent sight-obscuring.
                    b.     BuildingFacades:
                           i.       Facadesthatfaceapublicstreetshallextendnomorethan50feetwithout
                                  providing at least one of the following features: (a) a variation in building
                                  materials; (b) a building off-set of at least one foot; (c) a wall area that is
                                  entirelyseparatedfromotherwallareasbyaprojection,suchasanarcade;
                                  or (d) by other design features that reflect the building's structural system
                                  (See Figure 8). No building façade shall extend for more than 250 feet
                                  without a pedestrian connection between or through the building (see
                                  Figure 11).
                           ii.      Buildingsmorethanthreestoriesarerequiredtostepbacksixfeetfromthe
                                  building facade at the beginning of the fourth story.

                                                       CD4:198
   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                       § 4.132

Figure 7. Window Placement and Percentage of Facade

                      CD4:199
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                               Figure 8. Building Facade Articulation and Stepbacks

                     c.     WeatherProtection(fornon-residentialandmixed-usebuildings):

                            i.       A projecting facade element (awning, canopy, arcade, or marquee) is re-
                                    quired on the street-facing façade. Within the MSD sub-district, weather
                                    protection shall be provided across the entire length of the building front-
                                    age.

                            ii.      All weather protection must comply with the Oregon Structural Specialty
                                    Code in effect at the time of application for projections or encroachments
                                    into the public right-of-way.

                            iii.     Weather protection shall be maintained and in good condition.

                                                           CD4:200
            PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

      iv.     Marqueesshallhaveaminimumten-footclearancefromthebottomof the
             marquee to the sidewalk. Canopies and awnings shall have a minimum
             eight-foot clearance from the bottom of  the awning or canopy to the
             sidewalk.
      v.      The projecting façade element shall not extend into amenity zone or
             conflictwithstreetlights.If theprojectingfaçadeelementblockslightshed
             fromadjacentstreetlights,exteriorlightingshallbelocatedonthebuilding.
      vi.     Awnings shall match the width of storefronts or window openings.
      vii.    Internally lit awnings are not permitted.
      viii.   Awningsshallbemadeof glass,metal,oracombinationof thesematerials.
             Fabric awnings are not permitted.
d.     BuildingMaterials. Plane concrete block, plain concrete, T-111 or similar sheet
      materials, corrugated metal, plywood, sheet press board or vinyl siding may not
      beusedasexteriorfinishmaterials.Foundationmaterialmaybeplainconcreteor
      plainconcreteblockwherethefoundationmaterialisnotrevealedformorethan
      two feet. Use of brick and natural materials (wood) is encouraged.
e.     Roofsandrooflines.Exceptinthecaseof abuildingentrancefeature,roofsshall
      be designed as an extension of the primary materials used for the building and
      should respect the building's structural system and architectural style. False
      fronts and false roofs are not permitted.
f.      Rooftopfeatures/equipmentscreening:
      i.       The following rooftop equipment does not require screening:
             •        Solar panels, wind generators, and green roof features;
             •        Equipment under two feet in height.
      ii.      Elevatormechanicalequipmentmayextendabovetheheightlimitamaxi-
             mumof 16feetprovidedthatthemechanicalshaftisincorporatedintothe
             architecture of the building.
      iii.     Satellitedishesandothercommunicationsequipmentshallbelimitedtoten
             feet in height from the roof, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
             the roof edge and screened from public view to the extent possible.
      iv.     Allotherroof-mountedmechanicalequipmentshallbelimitedtotenfeetin
             height, shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the roof edge and
             screened from public view and from views from adjacent buildings.
      v.      On all structures exceeding 35 feet in height, roofs shall have drainage
             systems that are architecturally integrated into the building design.
      vi.     Anyexternalstairwells,corridorsandcirculationcomponentsof abuilding
             shall be architecturally compatible with the overall structure, through the
             use of similar materials, colors, and other building elements.
      vii.    Requiredscreeningshallnotbeincludedinthebuilding'smaximumheight
             calculation.

                                   CD4:201
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    g.     General Screening. Utility meters shall be located on the back or side of  a
                           building, screened from view from a public street to the greatest extent possible,
                           and shall be painted a color to blend with the building façade.

                    h.     PrimaryEntry.

                           i.      Forcommercial/institutional/mixed-usebuildings:

                                  •        At least one entry door is required for each business with a ground
                                         floor frontage.

                                  •        Eachentranceshallbecovered,recessed,ortreatedwithapermanent
                                         architectural feature in such a way that weather protection is pro-
                                         vided.

                                  •        All primary ground-floor common entries shall be oriented to the
                                         streetorapublicspacedirectlyfacingthestreet,orplacedatanangle
                                         up to 45 degrees from an adjacent street. Primary ground-floor
                                         common entries shall not be oriented to the interior or to a parking
                                         lot.

                                  •        Courtyards, plazas and similar entry features may be utilized to
                                         satisfy the building entrance requirement when these features are
                                         designed to connect the adjacent street edge to the main building
                                         entrance.

                           ii.     Forresidentialbuildings:

                                  •      Entrydoor.Theprimarypublicentrancetoeachbuildingunitshallbe
                                         covered,recessed,ortreatedwithapermanentarchitecturalfeaturein
                                         such a way that weather protection is provided.

                                  •        Allprimaryground-floorcommonentriesof multifamilybuildingsor
                                         individual unit entries of  attached residential units that front the
                                         streetshallbeorientedtothestreetorpublicright-of-way,nottothe
                                         interior or to a parking lot.

                    i.      Buildingprojections. Building projections are allowed as follows (see Figure 9):

                           i.       Architecturalelementssuchaseaves,cornicesandcornicesmayprojectup
                                  to one foot from the face of the building.

                           ii.      Baywindowsandbalconiesmayprojectuptofourfeetfromthefaceof the
                                  building.Balconiesthatprojectintotheright-of-wayshallhaveaminimum
                                  verticalclearanceof 12feetfromsidewalkgradeorbemountedatthefloor
                                  elevation, whichever is greater.

                           iii.     See also Subsection 4.132(.06)M.2.C. for standards related to weather
                                  protection.

                                                        CD4:202
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

                                    Figure 9. Building Projections

N.    Off StreetParkingandLoading. Parking standards are identified in Section 4.155.

O.    ParkingwithinaBuildingorStructure:

      1.      Parkingstructuresshallbedesignedtoallowreuseof thebuildingfornon-parkinguses,
             such as office or residential uses.

      2.      The ground floor façade of a structured parking facility that abuts a public sidewalk,
             street,oropenspaceandthatisnotoccupiedbyentrances,exits,orwaitingareasshall
             be designed and constructed with a minimum unfinished floor to ceiling height of 15
             feet in order to allow occupancy by uses other than parking that are permitted in the
             underlying district (see Figure 10).

      3.      Parking structures located in the MSD and adjacent to a public street shall contain
             retailorofficeusesonthefirstfloorfrontingthestreetorbewrappedwithdevelopment

                                                CD4:203
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    of equalorgreaterheightthantheparkingstructure.Atleast50percentof astreet-level
                    floor facing a public sidewalk, street, or open space area shall contain retail or office
                    uses to a minimum depth of 60 feet.
             4.      Facadeopeningsthatfaceapublicstreetoropenspaceshallbeverticallyandhorizon-
                    tally aligned and all floors fronting on those facades shall be level, not inclined.
             5.      The first floor facade of a parking structure located adjacent to a public street shall
                    include at least three architectural elements such as arcades, windows, awnings, over-
                    hangs, screens, grills, louvers or other similar non-opaque features.
             6.      Parking structures shall be designed so that motorized vehicles parked on all levels of
                    the structure are screened to a minimum height of 42 inches.
             7.      Where the upper floors of above-ground parking structures are visible from a public
                    street, such surfaces shall include architectural or vegetative finishes.
             8.      Withinasurfaceparkinglotorstructure,thebicyclespaces,carpool,vanpool,shared
                    car,orelectricvehiclechargingspacesshouldbeplacedinpreferredlocationsrelativeto
                    thestreet,thebuildingentrances,andtheprimarypedestrianrouteswithinandaround
                    the project site.

                                Figure 10. Parking Structure-Ground Floor Design

      P.     StreetConnectivity:
             1.     Purpose.Thepurposeof thesestandardsandproceduresistocreatesafe,comfortable,
                    andattractivestreetscapesforpedestrians,improveconnectivityforallmodesof travel,
                    and remove barriers for small-scale incremental development.
             2.     General Provisions. This section contains the standards and procedures for improve-
                    mentstopublictransportationfacilitiesforallpropertylocatedintheWilsonvilleTown
                    Center Boundary, including specific standards for vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, and
                    transit facilities. The terms "transportation facilities" and "transportation improve-
                    ments" generally include those facilities, or improvements to those facilities, that
                    accommodateallmodesof travelthatareusuallylocatedinpublicrights-of-way,also

                                                         CD4:204
                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

      commonlyreferredtoasstreets."Frontageimprovements"aretransportationimprove-
      ments immediately adjacent to a proposed development's street frontage. "Off-site
      improvements"aretransportationimprovementsnotadjacenttoaproposeddevelop-
      ment's street frontage.

3.     TransportationFacilityStandards:

      a.     Intersectiondesignandspacing:

             i.       Transportationfacilitiesshallbedesignedandconstructedinconformance
                    to the applicable section of the City Development Code and to the City's
                    Public Works Standards.

             ii.      Streetintersectionsshallhavecurbextensionstoreducepedestriancrossing
                    distances unless there are other standards that apply, such as areas with
                    flush curbs.

             iii.     New street intersections, including alleys, are subject to approval by the
                    City Engineer.

      b.     Transportationnetworkconnectivity:

             i.       Minimum  required  transportation  improvements  are  identified  in  the
                    Wilsonville Town Center Plan. Alleys are encouraged but not required.
                    Private streets are prohibited.

             ii.      Bicycle and pedestrian connections are required where the addition of a
                    connection would link the end of a permanent turnaround to an adjacent
                    streetorprovideamidblockconnectionthroughalongblock.Amid-block
                    connection is required where at least one block face is 400 feet or more in
                    length(seeFigure11).Arequiredconnectionmustgothroughtheinterior
                    of the block and connect the block face to its opposite block face. The
                    mid-blockcrossingshallbedemarcatedwithpaving,signage,ordesignthat
                    clearly demarcates the crossing is designated for pedestrian and bicycle
                    crossings.

                                         CD4:205
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                           Figure 11. Mid-Block Pedestrian and Bicycle Connections

                           iii.     Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the proposed develop-
                                 ment where necessary to give access to or allow for future development of
                                 adjoining properties.
                                 •        Anyrequiredorproposednewstreetsthroughoralongtheboundary
                                        of theproposeddevelopmentshallbeaccompaniedbyafuturestreet
                                        plan.Thefuturestreetplanshallshowthatitisfeasibletoextendall
                                        required or proposed new streets onto adjoining properties to the
                                        satisfaction of the City Engineer.
                                 •        Temporaryturnaroundsshallbeconstructedforstreetstubsinexcess
                                        of  150 feet in length. Drainage facilities shall be constructed to
                                        properly manage stormwater runoff from temporary turnarounds.
                                 •        Street stubs to adjoining properties shall not be considered perma-
                                        nent turnarounds, unless required and designed as permanent turn-
                                        arounds,sincetheyareintendedtocontinueasthroughstreetswhen
                                        adjoining properties develop.
                                 •        Reservestripsmayberequiredinordertoensuretheeventualcontin-
                                        uation or completion of a street.
                           iv.     Permanent dead end streets are not allowed except where no opportunity
                                 existsforcreatingathroughstreetconnection.Deadendstreetsshallmeet

                                                       CD4:206
     PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.132

      allfirecodeaccessrequirementsandshallonlybeusedwheretopographical
      constraints, protected natural resource areas, existing development pat-
      terns, or strict adherence to other City requirements precludes a future
      street connection. The lack of present ownership or control over abutting
      property shall not be grounds for a dead end street.
v.     Street design. All streets are subject to the standards illustrated in the
      Wilsonville Town Center Plan.
vi.     Street trees shall be required along all street frontages. The minimum
      number of required street trees shall be determined by dividing the length
      (infeet)of theproposeddevelopment'sstreetfrontageby30feet.Whenthe
      result is a fraction, the number of street trees required shall be the nearest
      whole number.
x.      Sidewalks shall have a minimum unobstructed width of six feet for pedes-
      trian through travel. Permanent structures or utilities within the required
      pedestrian through-travel area are restricted unless approved by the City
      Engineer.Sidewalkareaoutsideof therequiredthrough-travelareamaybe
      usedforlandscaping,pedestrianamenitiessuchaspermanentstreetfurni-
      ture, bicycle parking, trash cans, and drinking fountains.
xi.     Temporary placement of customer seating, merchandise display, tempo-
      raryA-framesignsorotherusesbybusinessesadjacenttothestreetshallbe
      placed within the amenity or building zone in front of the business (see
      Figure12).Thebuildingzonemaybeextendedintothepedestrianzonein
      frontof thebuildingif aminimumof fourfeetisprovidedforthepedestrian
      through area. Placement of  any temporary uses requires a temporary
      right-of-way use permit and approval by the City Engineer.
xii.    Temporary signs, such as A-Frames, are permitted within Town Center
      provided the temporary sign meets the following standards:
      •        One temporary sign is allowed per public entrance to buildings.
      •        Temporarysignsmaybeupto12squarefeetinarea.Onlyonesideof
             a portable sign will be counted. The vertical dimension of the sign
             including support structure may be no greater than 42 inches.
      •        Signs may be placed in front of the building only during business
             hours.
      •        Electrical signs and changing image sign features are prohibited.
xi.     Off  street paths shall meet the City's path standards identified in the
      Transportationsystemplan,unlessnotedotherwiseintheWilsonvilleTown
      Center Plan. The location and type of facility shall be consistent the trail
      andopenspace,andstreetcrosssectionillustratedintheWilsonvilleTown
      Center Plan. Trail widths may be reduced where constrained by existing
      development, protected natural resource areas, or topography as deter-
      mined by the City Engineer.

                            CD4:207
§ 4.132                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                      Figure 12. Sidewalk Furnishing and
                                           Pedestrian Through Zones

(Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Section  4.133.00. Wilsonville Road Interchange Area Management Plan (IAMP) Overlay Zone.

Section  4.133.01. Purpose.

The purpose of the IAMP Overlay Zone is the long-range preservation of operational efficiency and
safetyof theWilsonvilleRoadInterchange,whichprovidesaccessfromandtoInterstate5forresidents
andbusinessesinsouthWilsonville.TheWilsonvilleRoadInterchangeisavitaltransportationlinkfor
regional travel and freight movement and provides connectivity between the east and west side of the
community.Preservingcapacityandensuringsafetyof thisinterchangeandthetransportationsystemin
its vicinity is essential to existing businesses and residents in the southern parts of the City and to the
continuedeconomicandcommunitygrowthanddevelopmentinthevicinityof WilsonvilleRoadandthe
interchange.

                                                       CD4:208
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                            § 4.133.04

Section  4.133.02. Where these Regulations Apply.

Theprovisionsof thisSectionshallapplytolanduseapplicationssubjecttoSection4.004,Development
PermitRequired,forparcelswhollyorpartiallywithintheIAMPOverlayZone,asshownonFigureI-1.
Any conflict between the standards of  the IAMP Overlay Zone and those contained within other
chapters of the Development Code shall be resolved in favor of the Overlay Zone.

             FigureI-1:WilsonvilleRoadInterchangeAreaManagementPlan(IAMP)Overlay
                                                 District Map

Section  4.133.03. Permitted Land Uses.

Usesallowedintheunderlyingzoningdistrictsareallowedsubjecttootherapplicableprovisionsinthe
Code and this Section.

Section  4.133.04. Access Management.

In addition to the standards and requirements of Section 4.237 for land divisions and Street Improve-
mentStandardsinSection4.177,parcelswhollyorpartiallywithintheIAMPOverlayZonearegoverned
by the Access Management Plan in the Wilsonville Road Interchange Area Management Plan. The
following applies to land use and development applications subject to Sections 4.133.02 Applicability.
The provisions of Section 4.133.04 apply to:

      (.01)  Developmentorredevelopmentproposalsforparcelstwoacresorlessthataresubjecttothe
            requirements of Section 4.004 Development Permit.

                                                    CD4:209
§ 4.133.04                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.02)  Planned Development applications, pursuant to Section 4.140, as part of  Preliminary
             Approval (Stage One).

      (.03)  FinalApproval(StageTwo)PlannedDevelopmentapplications,pursuanttoSection4.140,
             to the extent that subsequent phases of development differ from the approved preliminary
             development plan, or where one or more of the following elements are not identified for
             subsequent phases:

             A.     Land uses.

             B.      Building location.

             C.     Building size.

             D.     Internal circulation.

      (.04)  AccessApproval:

             A.     Access to public streets within the IAMP Overlay Zone shall be reviewed for consis-
                    tency with the IAMP Access Management Plan.
             B.      Approvalof accesstoCitystreetswithintheIAMPOverlayZoneshallbegrantedonly
                    afterjointreviewbytheCityandtheOregonDepartmentof Transportation(ODOT).
                    Coordination of this review will occur pursuant to Section 4.133.05(.02).

             C.     Access approval is a Class II decision, pursuant to Section 4.030, and is based on the
                    standards contained in this Section, the provisions in Section 4.177 and Section 4.237
                    of this Code, and the Access Management Plan in the Wilsonville Road Interchange
                    Area Management Plan.
                    1.      Wheretherecommendationsof theAccessManagementPlanconflictwithother
                          accessandspacingrequirementsinSection4.177of thisCode,theIAMPAccess
                          Management Plan shall govern.
                    2.      Where development proposals are inconsistent with the Access Management
                          Plan, modifications to the Access Management Plan are required pursuant to
                          (.03) in this Section.

      (.05)  Cross-accesseasements:

             A.     PriortoapprovingaccessfortaxlotsthatareidentifiedintheAccessManagementPlan
                    (seeTable3andFigure5intheWilsonvilleRoadInterchangeAreaManagementPlan),
                    the City shall require that:
                    1.      The applicant demonstrate how cross access can be accomplished for sites
                          contiguous to the subject property or properties, consistent with the circulation
                          and planned local street network shown in the Interchange Area Management
                          Plan;
                    2.      If accessacrossanadjacentparcelorparcelsisnecessaryforthedevelopmentof
                          thesubjectsite,asignedcross-accessagreementissubmittedwiththeapplication;
                          and,

                                                      CD4:210
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.133.05

                   3.      For applications reviewed as part of a subdivision approval process, necessary
                          cross-access easements are shown and recorded on the final plat. Access widths
                          shallconsistentwithCityPublicWorksstandardsunlessbasedonaTransporta-
                          tionImpactAnalysis,developedpursuanttoSection4.133.05(.01)andapproved
                          by the City Engineer.
      (.06)  AccessManagementPlanModifications:
             A.     RecommendedactionsintheAccessManagementPlanarebasedonpropertyconfig-
                   urationsdevelopmentapplicationapprovalsandownershipexistingatthetimeof the
                   Wilsonville Road Interchange Area Management Plan's adoption. Lot consolidation
                   andotherlanduseactionsmaynecessitateanamendmenttotheAccessManagement
                   Plan. Modifications to the Access Management Plan:
                   1.      MayoccurthroughagreementbytheCityof WilsonvilleandODOTandrequire
                          anamendmenttotheWilsonvilleRoadInterchangeAreaManagementPlan;and
                   2.      Willonlybeallowedif theproposedmodificationsmeet,ormoveinthedirection
                          ofmeeting,theadoptedaccessmanagementspacingrequirementsintheWilsonville
                          Road Interchange Area Management Plan.

Section  4.133.05. Administration.
Section4.133.05delineatestheresponsibilitiesof theCity,incoordinationwithODOT,tomonitorand
evaluate vehicle trip generation impacts on the Wilsonville Road Interchange from development ap-
proved under this Section.
      (.01)  TrafficImpactAnalysis:
             A.    Purpose.Thepurposeof thissectionof theCodeistoimplementSection660-012-0045
                   (2) (e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the City to adopt a
                   process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize adverse
                   impacts to and protect transportation facilities. This section establishes the standards
                   for when a proposal in the IAMP Overlay Zone must be reviewed for potential traffic
                   impacts; when a Traffic Impact Analysis must be submitted with a development
                   application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts
                   to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a Traffic Impact Study; and
                   who is qualified to prepare the Study.
             B.    TypicalAverageDailyTrips. The latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual, pub-
                   lishedbytheInstituteof TransportationEngineers(ITE)shallbeusedasstandardsby
                   which to gauge average daily vehicle trips, unless a specific trip generation study is
                   approvedbytheCityEngineer.Atripgenerationstudycouldbeusedtodeterminetrip
                   generation for a specific land use which is not well represented in the ITE Trip
                   Generation Manual and for which a similar facility is available to count.
             C.     Whenrequired,aTrafficImpactAnalysisshallberequiredtobesubmittedtotheCity
                   with a land use application, when the following conditions apply:
                   1.      The development application involves one or more of the following actions:
                          a.      A change in zoning or a plan amendment designation; or

                                                     CD4:211
§ 4.133.05                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                           b.      The development requires a Development Permit pursuant to Section
                                  4.004; or
                           c.      Thedevelopmentmaycauseoneormoreof thefollowingeffectstoaccess
                                  or circulation, which can be determined by site observation, traffic impact
                                  analysis or study, field measurements, and information and studies pro-
                                  vided by the local reviewing jurisdiction and/or ODOT:
                                  i.       Thelocationof theaccessdrivewaydoesnotmeetminimumintersec-
                                         tionsightdistancerequirements,orislocatedwherevehiclesentering
                                         or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or
                                         hesitate, creating a safety hazard; or
                                  ii.      Thelocationof theaccessdrivewaydoesnotmeettheaccessspacing
                                         standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or
                                  iii.     Thelocationof theaccessdrivewayisinconsistentwiththeWilsonville
                                         RoadInterchangeAreaManagementPlanAccessManagementPlan.
                                  iv.     A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems,
                                         such as back up onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach
                                         area.

             D.    TrafficImpactAnalysisRequirements:
                    1.     Preparation. A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be prepared by a professional
                           engineer under retainer to the City. The traffic analysis will be paid for by the
                           applicant.

                    2.     Transportation Planning Rule Compliance. The traffic impact analysis shall be
                           sufficient in detail to determine compliance with Oregon Administrative Rule
                           (OAR) 660-012-0060.
                    3.     TrafficImpactAnalysisScoping.TheapplicantwillcoordinatewiththeWilsonville
                           City Engineer prior to submitting an application that requires a Traffic Impact
                           Analysis. The City has the discretion to determine the required elements of the
                           TIA and the level of analysis expected. Coordination with ODOT is advisable
                           and is at the City's discretion.

             E.    ApprovalCriteria:

                    1.     Criteria. When a Traffic Impact Analysis is required, approval of the develop-
                           ment proposal requires satisfaction of the following criteria:
                           a.      The Traffic Impact Analysis was prepared by a professional engineer
                                  selected by the City; and
                           b.      If theproposeddevelopmentmeetsthecriteriainSectionC,above,orother
                                  traffic hazard or negative impact to a transportation facility, the Traffic
                                  Impact Analysis shall include mitigation measures that meet the City's
                                  performance standards (i.e. Level-of-Service and/or Volume/Capacity ra-
                                  tio) and are satisfactory to the City Engineer and ODOT; and

                                                        CD4:212
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.133.06

                          c.      Theproposedsitedesignandtrafficandcirculationdesignandfacilities,for
                                 all transportation modes, including any mitigation measures, are designed
                                 to:
                                 i.       Have the least negative impact on all applicable transportation facil-
                                       ities; and
                                 ii.      Accommodate and encourage non-motor vehicular modes of trans-
                                       portation to the extent practicable; and
                                 iii.     Makethemostefficientuseof landandpublicfacilitiesaspracticable;
                                       and
                                 iv.     Provide the most direct, safe and convenient routes practicable be-
                                       tween on-site destinations, and between on-site and off-site destina-
                                       tions; and
                                 v.      Otherwise  comply  with  applicable  requirements  of  the  City  of
                                       Wilsonville's Development Code.
             F.     Conditions of Approval. The City may deny, approve, or approve a development
                   proposal with appropriate conditions.
                   1.      Where the existing transportation system will be impacted by the proposed
                          development,dedicationof landforstreets,transitfacilities,sidewalks,bikeways,
                          paths,oraccesswaysmayberequiredtoensurethatthetransportationsystemis
                          adequate to handle the additional burden caused by the proposed use.
                   2.      Where the existing transportation system is shown to be burdened by the pro-
                          poseduse,improvementssuchaspaving,curbing,installationorcontributionto
                          trafficsignals,constructionof sidewalks,bikeways,accessways,paths,orstreets
                          that serve the proposed use may be required.
                   3.      Where planned local street connectivity is required to improve local circulation
                          forthebettermentof interchangefunction,localstreetsystemimprovementswill
                          be required.
      (.02)  LandUseReviewCoordination:
             A.     The City shall not deem the land use application complete unless it includes a Traffic
                   Impact Analysis prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
             B.      The City shall provide written notification to ODOT when the application within ten
                   calendar days of receiving a complete Class II Permit application.
             C.     ODOTshallhaveatleast20calendardays,measuredfromthedatecompletionnotice
                   was mailed, to provide written comments to the City. If  ODOT does not provide
                   writtencommentsduringthis20-dayperiod,theCitystaff reportwillbeissuedwithout
                   consideration of ODOT comments.

Section  4.133.06. Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map Amendments.
ThisSectionappliestoallComprehensivePlanMapandZoningMapamendmentstoparcelswhollyor
partially within the IAMP Overlay Zone.
      (.01)  IAMPAmendment.If theproposedlanduseisinconsistentwiththecurrentComprehensive
             PlanMaporZoningMaplandusedesignationtheapplicantwillberequiredtoundertakea

                                                      CD4:213
§ 4.133.06                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

             legislativeprocesstoamendandupdatetheWilsonvilleRoadInterchangeAreaManagement
             Plan in order to demonstrate that the proposed amendment will be consistent with the
             planned improvements in the Overlay Zone.

      (.02)  TransportationPlanningRuleRequirements:
             A.    Reviewof ApplicationsforEffectonTransportationFacilities.Aproposedcomprehen-
                    sive plan amendment, zone change or land use regulation change pertaining develop-
                    ment within the IAMP Overlay Zone, whether initiated by the City or by a private
                    interest,shallbereviewedtodeterminewhetheritsignificantlyaffectsatransportation
                    facility, in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rule (OAR) 660-012-0060 (the
                    Transportation Planning Rule—"TPR"). "Significant" means the proposal would:
                    1.      Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation
                           facility (exclusive of correction of map errors in an adopted plan);
                    2.      Change standards implementing a functional classification system; or
                    3.      As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the adopted trans-
                           portation system plan:
                           a.      Allowlandusesorlevelsof developmentthatwouldresultintypesorlevels
                                  of traveloraccessthatareinconsistentwiththefunctionalclassificationof
                                  an existing or planned transportation facility;
                           b.      Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility
                                  belowtheminimumacceptableperformancestandardidentifiedintheTSP;
                                  or
                           c.      Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility
                                  that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable
                                  performance standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan.
             B.    AmendmentsThatAffectTransportationFacilities.Amendmentstothecomprehensive
                    plan and land use regulations that significantly affect a transportation facility shall
                    ensure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of
                    service of the facility identified in the TSP. This shall be accomplished by one or a
                    combination of the following:
                    1.      Adopting measures that demonstrate allowed land uses are consistent with the
                           planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the transportation
                           facility.
                    2.      Amending the TSP or comprehensive plan to provide transportation facilities,
                           improvementsorservicesadequatetosupporttheproposedlandusesconsistent
                           with the requirements of Section -0060 of the TPR.
                    3.      Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce de-
                           mand for vehicle travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transpor-
                           tation.
                    4.      Amending the TSP to modify the planned function, capacity or performance
                           standards of the transportation facility.

                                                       CD4:214
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.134

             C.    Traffic Impact Analysis. A Traffic Impact Analysis shall be submitted with a plan
                    amendment or zone change application. [See Section 4.133.05(.01) Traffic Impact
                    Analysis].
(Ord. No. 672, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.134. Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.

(.01)  Purpose.TheCoffeeCreekIndustrialDesignOverlayDistrict(CoffeeCreekDOD)isanoverlay
      district within the Planned Development Industrial - Regionally Significant Industrial Area
      (RSIA)ZoneSection4.135.5.Thepurposeof thisCoffeeCreekDODistoimplementtheCoffee
      CreekIndustrialAreaMasterPlan(2007)byestablishingstandardsforstreetdesignandconnec-
      tivity, site design and circulation, building form, and building architecture and landscape for all
      development located within the master plan area. These standards are intended to result in:
      A.     Anindustrialdistrictfeaturingcohesiveandhigh-qualitysite,landscape,andbuildingdesign
             that is well integrated with adjacent streetscapes and other public spaces.

      B.      Amulti-modaltransportationnetworkaccommodatingpedestrians,bicyclists,transitriders,
             motorists, and freight in the context of a modern light industrial district.
      C.     Preservation of trees and natural features.

      D.     Minimizationof adverseimpactstoadjacentpropertiesfromdevelopmentthatdetractsfrom
             the character and appearance of the area.
      E.     Minimization of the off-site visibility of vehicular parking, circulation and loading areas.

      F.      Creation of a pleasant and functional industrial district for employees and visitors.
      G.     A predictable and timely process for reviewing light industrial development applications.

(.02)  Applicability. The Coffee Creek DOD shall apply to all properties within the Coffee Creek
      IndustrialAreaMasterPlanasshownintheRegulatingPlan(FigureCC-1).Theprovisionsof this
      section shall apply to:
      A.     All new building construction.

      B.      Anyexteriormodificationstoexisting,non-residentialbuildings,subjecttoSection4.134(.03).

      C.     All development of site improvements including but not limited to new paved parking lots,
             outdoor storage, display areas, signs, and landscaping.

      D.     All building expansions greater than 1,250 square feet.

(.03)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following:

      A.     Maintenanceof theexteriorof anexistingindustrial/employmentstructure,suchaspainting
             to the approved color palette, reroofing, or residing with the same or similar materials.
      B.      Interior remodeling.

      C.     Maintenance of existing dwellings and accessory buildings.

      D.     Maintenance of agricultural buildings.

                                                        CD4:215
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.04)  UsesthatAreTypicallyPermitted. The uses permitted shall be governed by Section 4.135.5(.03).

(.05)  ProhibitedUses: The uses prohibited shall be governed by Section 4.135.5(.04).

(.06)  Overviewof CoffeeCreekDODStandards:

      A.    Section 4.134(.09) Regulating Plan. The Regulating Plan organizes all existing and future
             streets,drives,andshared-usepathswithintheCoffeeCreekIndustrialAreaintoahierarchy
             of Addressing Streets, Supporting Streets and Through Connections.

      B.    Section4.134(.10)ConnectivityStandards:
             1.      New Supporting Streets and Through Connections are required within the Coffee
                   Creek DOD to meet Connectivity Requirements as shown on Figure CC-4.

             2.      The Street Types specify the cross sections for each of the street and shared-use path
                   types within the Regulating Plan. These cross section specifications apply to both
                   existingandproposednewstreets.Arangeof crosssectionsforSupportingStreetsand
                   Through Connections is permitted and detailed in Figures CC-2 and CC-3.

      C.    Section4.134(.11)DevelopmentStandardsTable:
             1.      TheDevelopmentStandardsTableprovidesanoverviewof allapplicabledevelopment
                   standards. The development standards for any given parcel are determined by the
                   existingorfuturestreetorshared-usepathtypeonwhichtheparcelfronts,asdetailed
                   in Table CC-1.
             2.      AreasboundedbynewSupportingStreetsandThroughConnectionsaredesignatedas
                   ParcelsandarerequiredtocomplywithDevelopmentStandardsgoverningsitedesign,
                   buildingorientationandfrontage.Thedevelopmentstandardsforsitedesign,building
                   façade and landscape design are intended to work in tandem with the street types to
                   create a cohesive and unified public realm.
             3.      AdjustmentstoDevelopmentStandardsmaybegrantedbythePlanningDirectorfor
                   quantifiableprovisions,asnotedinTablesCC-1thoughCC-4,if thePlanningDirector
                   findsthattheadjustedDevelopmentStandardwillperformaswellastheDevelopment
                   Standard.

      D.    Coffee Creek DOD Pattern Book. The Coffee Creek DOD Pattern Book provides supple-
             mental design guidelines, which are intended to allow more flexibility in design than the
             Development Standards while satisfying the purpose of the Coffee Creek DOD.

(.07)  ReviewProcess. Development applications shall follow the application review process described
      in:

      A.     Section 4.197 Zone Changes and Amendments.

      B.      Section 4.198 Comprehensive Plan Changes.

      C.     Section 4.700 Annexation and Urban Growth Boundary Amendments.

      D.     Section 4.140 Planned Development Regulations.

                                                      CD4:216
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.134

(.08)  Waivers. The Development Review Board may waive standards as listed in Section 4.134(.11),
      consistent with the provisions of Section 4.118(.03).

      A.     Thefollowingstandardsshallnotbewaived,unlessthereissubstantialevidenceinthewhole
             record to support a finding that the intent and purpose of the standards will be met in
             alternative ways:

             1.      Required minimum building height as provided in Section 4.134(.11) Table CC-4;

             2.      ParkinglocationanddesignalongaddressingstreetsinSection4.134(.11)TableCC-3;
                   and

             3.      Parcel pedestrian access as listed in Section 4.134(.11) Table CC-3.

      B.      Inadditiontomeetingthepurposesandobjectivesof Section4.140,anywaiversgrantedin
             the Coffee Creek DOD must be found to be consistent with the intent of the Coffee Creek
             DOD Pattern Book.

(.09)  CoffeeCreekDODRegulatingPlan,FigureCC-1:

      A.    Componentsof theRegulatingPlanMap:

             1.     AddressingStreets. Existing and planned streets within the Regulating Plan Area are
                   calledAddressingStreetsandincludeCahalinRoad,DayRoad,ClutterStreet,Grahams
                   Ferry Road, Garden Acres Road, and "Future" Street.

             2.     OverlayDistrict.LandareaidentifiedwithintheCoffeeCreekDODonFigureCC-1is
                   subject to additional Connectivity Standards as detailed in Figure CC-4 and Table
                   CC-1.

                                                     CD4:217
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.10)  CoffeeCreekConnectivityStandards:

      A.    StreetTypes,FigureCC-1.WithinthelandareaboundedbyAddressingStreets,connectivity
             shall be provided through new streets or private drives and shared use paths. The location,
             alignment, and cross-section of required streets or private drives and shared-use paths is
             flexible, as long as they comply with spacing and minimum cross section standards. New
             connections may be one of the following types:

             1.     SupportingStreets.SupportingStreetsarenewpublicstreetsorpubliceasements.They
                    shall meet the development standards set out in Figure CC-2.
                    a.      ARequiredSupportingStreetisonethatintersectswithanAddressingStreetas
                           shown on Figure CC-1. The exact location and design of these connections will
                           be determined at the time of development review.
                    b.      Planned Intersections are locations where Existing and Planned Addressing
                           Streets intersect with required Supporting Streets, and Planned Pathways, as
                           generally shown in Figure CC-1.

             2.     ThroughConnections.ThroughConnectionsarenewpublicstreetsorpubliceasements
                    with multi-use paths, or streets or public easements that combine characteristics of
                    streets and multi-use paths. They shall meet the Development Standards set out in
                    Figure CC-3.

                                                       CD4:218
                        PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.134

B.      Planned Pathways are multi-use paths or pedestrian connections that are planned in the
      Transportation Systems Plan to occur in the location generally shown in Figure CC-1. A
      Planned Pathway may be employed to meet required connectivity, if  it complies with
      Through Connection Standards for Connection Spacing and Connection Type, see Figure
      CC-6.

C.    MaximumConnectionSpacing:

      1.      Addressing Streets. When intersecting with an Addressing Street, new Supporting
            StreetsandThroughConnectionsshallmeetmaximumspacingstandardsassetoutin
            Table CC-1.

      2.      Internal Supporting Streets and Through Connections. See Figure CC-4 and Table
            CC-1.

D.    RequiredConnectivityMasterPlan.ConnectivityMasterPlansarerequiredforalldevelop-
      ment within the Coffee Creek DOD. Development proposals shall show conceptually how
      theConnectivityRequirementswillbemet.Inaddition,theConnectivityMasterPlanshould
      generallyindicatehowparking,driveways,walkways,waysides,etc.,willrelateorconnectto
      adjacent parcels.

                                             CD4:219
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                  CD4:220
                            PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                           § 4.134

(.11)  Development Standards Table. Areas bounded by Addressing Streets, Supporting Streets and
     ThroughConnectionsshallbedesignatedasaParcelandsubjecttotheDevelopmentStandardsin
     Tables CC-1 through CC-4.

                                                 CD4:221
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                    Table CC-1: Street Design and Connectivity
                                    Addressing Streets            Supporting Streets         Through Connections
General                             Development Standards within this table are not adjustable.
Connection Spacing        Not applicable, Ad-                   600 feet, maximum, centerline to centerline.
                                dressing Streets exist or       Supporting Streets and Through Connections
                                are planned                     shall intersect with Garden Acres Road as shown
                                                                on Figure CC-1, Regulating Plan; or if the Ad-
                                                                dressing Street is Day Road, no less than 1,000
                                                                feet apart, centerline to centerline.
Connection Type             Addressing Streets are              Supporting Streets are          Through Connections
                                Day Road, Grahams               those meeting Specifica-        are those meeting Speci-
                                Ferry Road, Cahalin             tions, Figure CC-2.             fications, Figure CC- 3.
                                Road, Garden Acres              A Required Supporting           Through Connections
                                Road, Clutter Street,           Street is one that inter-       may be multimodal or
                                and "Future" Street.            sects with an Address-          used exclusively for bi-
                                                                ing Street. The exact           cycle and pedestrian
                                                                location and design of          access.
                                                                these connections will
                                                                be determined at the
                                                                time of development
                                                                review.
Connection Hierarchy            If one of the streets or connections bounding a parcel is an Addressing
and Primary Frontage            Street, the Addressing Street shall be the Primary Frontage.
                                If none of the bounding streets or connections is an Addressing Street, a
                                Supporting Street shall be the Primary Frontage.
                                See Figure CC-5.

                                                          CD4:222
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                   § 4.134

Supp. No. 3                                CD4:223
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                    Table CC-2: District-Wide Planning and Landscaping
                                           Addressing Streets             Supporting Streets          Through Connections
General                             The following provisions apply:
                                           •  Section 4.176 for landscaping standards
                                           •  Section 4.610.10 for tree removal, relocation or replacement.
                                           •  Section 4.610.10(.01)C. for consideration of development alternatives
                                            to preserve wooded areas & trees.

                                                                     Table CC-3: Site Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
 1.  Parcel Access
General                                  Unless noted otherwise below, the following provisions apply:
                                           •     Section 4.177(.02) for street design;
                                           •     Section 4.177(.03) to (.10) for sidewalks, bike facilities, pathways, transit im-
                                             provements, access drives & intersection spacing.
                                      The following Development Standards are adjustable:
                                           •     Parcel Driveway Spacing: 20%
                                           •     Parcel Driveway Width: 10%
Parcel Driveway Access       Not applicable                       Limited by connection                         Limited by connection
                                                                           spacing standards                    standards for motorized
                                                                           Parcel Driveway Access               vehicle access.
                                                                           may be employed to meet              Parcel Driveway Access
                                                                           required connectivity, if it         may be employed to meet
                                                                           complies with Supporting             required connectivity, if it
                                                                           Street Standards for Con-            complies with Through
                                                                           nection Spacing and Con-             Connection Standards for
                                                                           nection Type, see Figure             Connection Spacing and
                                                                           CC-6.                                Connection Type, see Fig-
                                                                           Subject to approval by               ure CC-6.
                                                                           City Engineer                        Subject to approval by
                                                                                                                City Engineer
Parcel Driveway Spacing     Not applicable                       150 feet, minimum
                                                                           See Figure CC-6                   150 feet, minimum See Figure CC-6
Parcel Driveway Width        Not applicable                       24 feet, maximum or com-                      24 feet, maximum or com-
                                                                           plies with Supporting                plies with Through Con-
                                                                           Street Standards for pri-            nection Standards for pri-
                                                                           mary driveway providing              mary driveway providing
                                                                           access for passenger vehi-           access for passenger vehi-
                                                                           cles, light delivery, etc. 40        cles, light delivery, etc. 40
                                                                           feet, maximum for second-            feet, maximum for second-
                                                                           ary driveway providing               ary driveway providing
                                                                           access for heavy delivery            access for heavy delivery
                                                                           vehicles, large trucks, etc.         vehicles, large trucks, etc.
 2.  Parcel Pedestrian Access
General                                  Unless noted otherwise below, the following provisions apply:
                                           •     Section 4.154 (.01) for separated & direct pedestrian connections between
                                             parking, entrances, street right-of-way & open space
                                           •     Section 4.167 (.01) for points of access
Parcel Pedestrian Access
Spacing                                  No restriction
Parcel Pedestrian Access
Width                                     8 feet wide, minimum for pedestrian connections between the primary street front-age and Primary Building Entrance(s).
Parcel Pedestrian Access
to Transit                               Provide separated & direct pedestrian connections between transit stops and park-ing, entrances, street right-of-way & open space.
 3.  Parcel Frontage

Supp. No. 3                                                        CD4:224
                                      PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                  § 4.134

                                                        Table CC-3: Site Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
Parcel Frontage, Defined     Parcel Frontage shall be defined by the linear distance between centerlines of the
                                    perpendicular Supporting Streets and Through-Parcel Connections. Where Parcel
                                    Frontage occurs on a curved segment of a street, Parcel Frontage shall be defined
                                    as the linear dimension of the Chord.
Primary Frontage, Defined  The Primary Frontage is the Parcel Frontage on an Addressing Street. If the parcel
                                    is not bounded by Addressing Streets, it is the Parcel Frontage on a Supporting
                                    Street.
                                    See Figure CC-5.
Parcel Frontage Occupied                                                No minimum
by a Building                         A minimum of 100 feet of the Primary Frontage shall
                                    be occupied by a building.
                                    The maximum Primary
                                    Frontage occupied by a
                                    building shall be limited
                                    only by required side yard
                                    setbacks.
 4.  Parking Location and Design
General                                  Unless noted otherwise below, the following provisions apply:
                                         •     Section 4.155 (03) Off-Street Parking Requirements
                                         •     Section 4.155 (04) Bicycle Parking
                                         •     Section 4.155 (06) Carpool and Vanpool Parking Requirements
                                         •     Section 4.176 for Parking Perimeter Screening and Landscaping—permits the
                                           parking landscaping and screening standards as multiple options
                                    The following Development Standards are adjustable:
                                         •     Parking Location and Extent: up to 20 spaces permitted on an Addressing
                                           Street
Parking Location and Ex-                                                Parking is permitted be-            Parking is permitted be-
tent                                         Limited to 16 spaces, max-imum. 50% of spaces des-tween right-of-way of tween right-of-way of
                                    ignated for short-term (1           Supporting Street and               Through Connection and
                                    hour or less), visitor, and         building.                           building.
                                    disabled parking only be-
                                    tween right-of-way of Ad-
                                    dressing Street and build-
                                    ing.
Parking Setback                    20 feet minimum from the             15 feet minimum from the            10 feet minimum from the
                                    right-of-way of an Ad-              right-of-way of a Support-          right-of-way of a Through
                                    dressing Street.                    ing Street.                         Connection.
Parking Lot Sidewalks         Where off-street parking                  Where off-street parking areas are designed for motor
                                    areas are designed for mo-          vehicles to overhang beyond curbs, planted areas adja-
                                    tor vehicles to overhang            cent to the curbs shall be increased to a minimum of
                                    beyond curbs, sidewalks             nine (9) feet in depth.
                                    adjacent to the curbs shall
                                    be increased to a minimum
                                    of seven (7) feet in depth.
Parking Perimeter Screen-                                                                                   Screen parking area from
ing and Landscaping            Screen parking area from view from Addressing Streets and Supporting Streets by means of one or more of the view from Through Con-
                                    following:                                                              nections by means of
                                    a.  General Landscape Standard, Section 4.176 (.02) C.                  a.  Low Screen Landscape
                                    b.  Low Berm Standard, Section 4.176 (.02) E., except                       Standard, Section
                                        within 50 feet of a perpendicular Supporting Street                     4.176(.02) D., or
                                        or Through Connection as measured from the                          b.    High Screen Landscap-
                                        centerline.                                                            ing Standard, Section
                                                                                                               4.176(.02)F., or
                                                                                                            c.  High Wall Standard,
                                                                                                               Section 4.176(.02)G., or
                                                                                                            d.  Partially Sight-obscur-ing Fence Standard,
                                                                                                                Section 4.176(.02)I.

Supp. No. 6                                                      CD4:225
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                          Table CC-3: Site Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
Off-Street Loading Berth     One loading berth is per-                    No limitation. Shall meet minimum standards in Sec-
                                     mitted on the front façade           tion 4.155(.05).
                                     of a building facing an
                                     Addressing Street. The
                                     maximum dimensions for
                                     a loading are 16 feet wide
                                     and 18 feet tall. A clear
                                     space 35 feet, minimum is
                                     required in front of the
                                     loading berth.
                                     The floor level of the load-
                                     ing berth shall match the
                                     main floor level of the pri-
                                     mary building. No ele-
                                     vated loading docks or
                                     recessed truck wells are
                                     permitted.
                                     Access to a Loading Berth
                                     facing an Addressing
                                     Street may cross over, but
                                     shall not interrupt or alter,
                                     a required pedestrian path
                                     or sidewalk. All transitions
                                     necessary to accommodate
                                     changes in grade between
                                     access aisles and the load-
                                     ing berth shall be inte-
                                     grated into adjacent site or
                                     landscape areas.
                                     Architectural design of a
                                     loading berth on an Ad-
                                     dressing Street shall be
                                     visually integrated with the
                                     scale, materials, colors,
                                     and other design elements
                                     of the building.
Carpool and Vanpool                  No limitation
Parking
 5.  Grading and Retaining Walls
General                                  The following Development Standards are adjustable:
                                     •     Retaining Wall Design: 20%
Maximum height                  Where site topography requires adjustments to natural grades, landscape retaining
                                     walls shall be 48 inches tall maximum when visible from adjacent streets and 60
                                     inches tall maximum when visible only to users from within a site.
                                     Where the grade differential is greater than 30 inches, retaining walls may be
                                     stepped.
Required Materials               Materials for retaining walls shall be unpainted cast-in-place, exposed-aggregate, or
                                     board-formed concrete; brick masonry; stone masonry; or industrial-grade, weath-
                                     ering steel plate.
Retaining Wall Design         Retaining walls longer than 50 linear feet shall be tiered, introducing a 5-foot, mini-
                                     mum horizontal offset between the lowest part and upper part(s) of the wall to re-
                                     duce their apparent mass.
 6.  Planting
General                                  Unless noted otherwise below, the following provisions apply:
                                          •     Section 4.176 Landscaping and Screening Standards

Supp. No. 6                                                        CD4:226
                                      PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                   § 4.134

                                                        Table CC-3: Site Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
Landscaping Standards                                                   General Landscape Stan-
Permitted                               General Landscape Stan-dard, Section 4.176(.02 C. dard, Section 4.176(.02)C.
                                    Low Berm Standard, Sec-             Low Screen Landscape
                                    tion 4.176(.02)E., except           Standard, Section
                                    within 50 feet of a perpen-         4.176(.02)D.
                                    dicular Supporting Street           Screen loading areas with
                                    or Through Connection as            High Screen Landscaping
                                    measured from the                   Standard, Section
                                    centerline                          4.176(.02)F., and High
                                                                        Wall Standard, Section
                                                                        4.176(.02)G.
 7. Location and Screening of Utilities and Services
General                                  Unless noted otherwise below, the following provisions apply:
                                         •     Sections 4.179 and 4.430. Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage in New
                                           Multi-Unit Residential and Non-Residential Buildings
Location and Visibility        Site and building service,               Site and building service,          No limitation
                                    equipment, and outdoor              utility equipment, and out-
                                    storage of garbage, recy-           door storage of garbage,
                                    cling, or landscape mainte-         recycling, or landscape
                                    nance tools and equipment           maintenance tools and
                                    is not permitted                    equipment is not permit-
                                                                        ted within the setback
Required Screening              Not permitted                       High Screen Landscaping Standard, Section
                                                                        4.176(.02)F. and/or High Wall Standard, Section 4.176
                                                                        (.02) G.

Supp. No. 3                                                      CD4:227
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Supp. No. 3                                                        CD4:228
                                       PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                     § 4.134

                                                       Table CC-4: Building Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
 1.  Building Orientation
Front Façade                         Buildings shall have one designated front façade and two designated side façades.
                                     If one of the streets or connections bounding a parcel is an Addressing Street, the
                                     front façade of the building shall face the Addressing Street.
                                     If two of the streets or connections bounding a parcel are Addressing Streets, the
                                     front façade of the building may face either Addressing Street, except when one of
                                     the Addressing Streets is Day Road. In that case, the front façade must face Day
                                     Road.
                                     If none of the bounding streets or connections is an Addressing Street, the front
                                     façade of the building shall face a Supporting Street.
                                     See Figure CC-5.
Length of Front Façade       A minimum of 100 feet of the Primary Frontage shall be occupied by a building.
                                     The maximum Primary Frontage occupied by a building shall be limited only by
                                     required side yard setbacks.
Articulation of Front Fa-
çade                                        Applies to a Front Façade longer than 175 feet that has more than 5,250 square feet of street-facing façade area:
                                     At least 10% of the street-facing façade of a building facing an Addressing Street
                                     must be divided into façade planes that are offset by at least 2 feet from the rest of
                                     the façade. Façade area used to meet this standard may be recessed behind, or proj-
                                     ect out from, the primary façade plane.
 2.  Primary Building Entrance
General                                  The following Development Standards are adjustable:
                                          •     Required Canopy: 20%
                                          •     Transparency: 20%
Accessible Entrance*            The Primary Building Entrance shall be visible from, and accessible to, an Address-
                                     ing Street (or a Supporting Street if there is no Addressing Street frontage). A con-
                                     tinuous pedestrian pathway shall connect from the sidewalk of an Addressing Street
                                     to the Primary Building Entrance with a safe, direct and convenient path of travel
                                     that is free from hazards and provides a reasonably smooth and consistent surface
                                     consistent with the requirements of Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
                                     The Primary Building Entrance shall be 15 feet wide, minimum and 15 feet tall,
                                     minimum.
Location                                150 feet, maximum from            150 feet, maximum from right-of-way of a Supporting
                                     right-of-way of an Ad-               Street, if there is no Addressing Street Frontage, see
                                     dressing Street, see Figure          Figure CC-7.
                                     CC-7.
Visibility                                Direct line of sight from an Addressing Street to the Primary Building Entrance.
Accessibility                          Safe, direct, and convenient path from adjacent public sidewalk.
Required Canopy*                Protect the Primary Building Entrance with a canopy with a minimum vertical
                                     clearance of 15 feet and an all-weather protection zone that is 8 feet deep, minimum
                                     and 15 feet wide, minimum.
Transparency                        Walls and doors of the Primary Building Entrance shall be a minimum of 65%
                                     transparent.
Lighting                                 The interior and exterior of the Primary Building Entrance shall be illuminated to
                                     extend the visual connection between the sidewalk and the building interior from
                                     day to night. Pathway lighting connecting the Primary Building Entrance to the
                                     adjacent sidewalk on an Addressing Street shall be scaled to the needs of the pedes-
                                     trian.
                                     Comply with Outdoor Lighting, Section 4.199
 3.  Overall Building Massing
General                                  The following Development Standards are adjustable:
                                          •     Required Minimum Height: 10%
                                          •     Ground Floor Height: 10%
                                          •     Base, Body, and Top Dimensions: 10%
                                          •     Base Design: 10%
                                          •     Top Design: 10%

Supp. No. 3                                                       CD4:229
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                       Table CC-4: Building Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
Front Setback                       30 feet, minimum, except
                                      as provided below                 30 feet maximum                  30 feet maximum
Allowance of Primary                                                       Not applicable                       Not applicable
Building Entrance *              Where the Primary Build-ing Entrance is located on
                                      an Addressing Street it
                                      may extend into the re-
                                      quired front yard setback
                                      by 15 feet maximum pro-
                                      vided that:
                                      a.  It has a two-story mass-
                                         ing with a minimum
                                         height of 24 feet;
                                      b.  The Parcel Frontage on
                                         the Addressing Street is
                                         limited to 100 feet;
                                      c.  The building extension
                                         is 65% transparent,
                                         minimum;
                                      d.  The entrance is pro-
                                          tected with a weather-
                                          protecting canopy with
                                          a minimum vertical
                                          clearance of 15 feet;
                                          and
                                      e.  The standards for site
                                         design and accessibility
                                         are met.
Required Minimum
Height                                    30 feet minimum.
Ground Floor Height*         The Ground Floor height shall measure 15 feet, minimum from finished floor to
                                      finished ceiling (or 17.5 feet from finished floor to any exposed structural member).
Base, Body, and Top Di-               Buildings elevations shall be composed of a clearly demarcated base, body and top.
mensions                              a.  For Buildings 30 feet in height (unless lower by adjustment):
                                           i.  The base shall be 30 inches, minimum.
                                           ii.  The body shall be equal to or greater than 75% of the overall height of the
                                             building.
                                           iii.  The top of the building shall be 18 inches, minimum.
                                      b.  For Buildings between 30 feet and 5 stories in height:
                                           i.  The base shall be 30 inches, minimum; 2 stories, maximum.
                                           ii.  The body shall be equal to or greater than 75% of the overall height of the
                                             building.
                                           iii.  The top of the building shall be 18 inches, minimum.
                                      c.  For Buildings greater than 6 stories in height:
                                           i.  The base shall be 1 story, minimum, 3 stories, maximum.
                                           ii.  The body shall be equal to or greater than 75% of the overall height of the
                                             building.
                                           iii.  The top of the building shall be 18 inches, minimum.
Base Design                           The design of the building Base shall:
                                      a.  Use a material with a distinctive appearance, easily distinguished from the build-
                                         ing Body expressed by a change in material, a change in texture, a change in
                                         color or finish; and/or
                                      b.  Create a change in surface position where the Base projects beyond the Body of
                                         the building by 1½ inches, minimum; and/or
                                      c.  Low Berm Landscape Standard, Section 4.176(.02)E.

Supp. No. 3                                                        CD4:230
                                      PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                  § 4.134

                                                     Table CC-4: Building Design
                                                        Addressing Streets                  Supporting Streets               Through Connections
Top Design                            Building Tops define the skyline.
                                    The design of the Building Top shall:
                                    a.  Use a material with a distinctive appearance, easily distinguished from the build-
                                        ing Body expressed by a change in material, a change in texture, a change in
                                        color or finish; and/or
                                    b.  Create a change in surface position where the Top projects beyond, or recesses
                                        behind, the Body of the building by 1½ inches, minimum.
Required Screening of
Roof-mounted Equipment  Screen roof-mounted equipment with architectural enclosures using the materials and design of the building Body and/ or the building Top. No roof-mounted equip-
                                    ment shall be visible from an Addressing Street or Supporting Street.

       * When an applicant elects to use the allowed adjustment to reduce Required Canopy height to less than 15
       feet, corresponding reduction in minimum height is allowed for Accessible Entrance, Allowance of Primary
       Building Entrance, and Ground Floor Height.

Supp. No. 3                                                      CD4:231
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.12)  Waysides:

       A.     Purpose. This section consists of standards and regulations for use throughout the Coffee
              Creek Design Overlay District. The regulations address materials, placement, layout, instal-
              lation, and maintenance of Industrial Waysides. The City recognizes the need to:
              1.      Provide multiple, distributed destinations for passive and active recreation for the
                     public and employees along a network of streets and trails;
              2.      Be convenient, usable and accessible. Industrial Waysides should be physically and
                     visually accessible from the adjacent Addressing Street, Supporting Street or Through
                     Connection;
              3.      Connect Industrial Waysides to transit;
              4.      Be inviting. Inviting open spaces feature designs that encourage users to explore the
                     Industrial Wayside and design elements that support a sense of the human scale. These
                     elements include landscaping, benches and other seating areas, and pedestrian-scaled
                     lighting;
              5.      Provide access. Provide access to the employees and the public between the hours of
                     6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
              6.      Be safe. Safe open spaces incorporate principles of natural surveillance, lighting, and
                     prominent entrances;
              7.      Provide facilities appropriate for the scale of the proposed development; and
              8.      Be easy to maintain. Industrial Waysides should be constructed of commercial grade
                     materials that will endure and are readily maintainable.

       B.      Applicability. All projects in the Coffee Creek Master Plan Area shall provide waysides
              according to the standards in Table CC-5.

       C.     General. The following development standards apply to all Waysides:
              1.      Required Wayside Area is exclusive of required landscape screening.
              2.      Required Minimum Dimension of 20 feet (either width or depth).

       D.     Criteria. Waysides shall meet the following criteria:
              1.      Perimeter Landscaping. In addition to the minimum size and dimensions, landscape
                     three sides of the Industrial Wayside to a depth of 20 feet, minimum according to
                     Section 4.176(.02). Permitted screening includes: Section 4.176(.02)D. Low Screen
                     Landscaping Standard; Section 4.176(.02)E. Low Berm Standard; or Section 4.176(.02)F.
                     High Screen Landscaping Standard. Perimeter landscaping shall not obscure visual
                     access to the Industrial Wayside. Unscreened surface parking lots, chain link fencing,
                     or service yards are prohibited adjacent to Industrial Waysides.
              2.      Visibility. Industrial Waysides shall be visible from and accessible to Addressing Streets.
              3.      Accessible Pathway. A paved walking surface, width: Five feet, minimum, meeting
                     ADA standards is required to connect Industrial Wayside with Addressing Street.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:232
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.134

              4.      Accessible Surface. Industrial Waysides shall have an accessible surface, 100 square feet,
                     minimum; dimensions ten feet, minimum meeting ADA standards.
              5.      Required Amenities:
                     a.      Seating. Outdoor seating shall be provided. Publicly accessible plazas, court-
                            yards, and pocket parks shall include at least one linear foot of seating per each 40
                            square feet of plaza, courtyard or pocket park space on site. Outdoor seating shall
                            be in the form of:
                            i.       Free standing outdoor benches consistent with the standards; or
                            ii.      Seating incorporated into low walls, berms, or raised planters.
                     b.      Landscaping. The landscaping must be planted and maintained according to
                            Section 4.176(.02)C.
                     c.      Lighting.
                     d.      Recycling/ Waste Receptacle. Locate waste and recycling stations nearest to the
                            accessible path and away from stormwater facilities.

              6.      Installation and Maintenance. Industrial Waysides shall be programmed, planned,
                     constructed, and maintained at the expense of the applicant. The landscaping must be
                     planted and maintained according to Section 4.176(.07). Recycling, waste receptacles,
                     and pet waste stations shall be serviced at an acceptable professional interval to prevent
                     being over filled or creating unsanitary or visually messy appearances.
              7.      Solar Access. Exposure to sunlight. Southern exposure is encouraged. Design facilities
                     to permit direct sunlight to enter the Industrial Wayside and strike the required
                     accessible surface between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. local time.
              8.      Lighting. Lighting for Industrial Waysides is required to permit reasonable use, utility,
                     security, and nighttime safety. Lighting installed in Industrial Waysides shall conform
                     to the requirements of Section 4.199. All outside lighting shall be so arranged and
                     shielded so as not to shine into adjacent areas and to prevent any undue glare or
                     reflection and any nuisance, inconvenience, and hazardous interference of any kind on
                     adjoining streets or property.

       E.     Optional Amenities include the following:
              1.      Picnic tables and benches. Locate picnic tables and benches on the Accessible Surface;

              2.      Arbors or trellises;
              3.      Drinking Fountains. Locate drinking fountains and benches on the Accessible Surface;

              4.      Sculpture and other works of art;

              5.      Bicycle repair stations;
              6.      Exercise stations; or

              7.      Pet waste stations. Locate pet waste stations nearest to the accessible path and away
                     from stormwater facilities.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:233
§ 4.134                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                Table CC-5: Waysides

                 Parcel Area                            Required Wayside Area         Number of Waysides         Enhanced Transit Plaza ‡
                Less than or equal to 5.0
                acres                                       Not required                          n/a                   n/a
                 Greater than 5.0 acres, less
                than or equal to 8.0 acres     400 square feet, minimum    One                  Not permitted
                Greater than 8.0 acres, less
                than or equal to 13.0 acres   600 square feet, minimum    One                  Not permitted
                 Greater than 13.0 acres,           800 square feet, minimum    One, mini-
                less than or equal to 23.0                                             mum                Permitted*. Up to 400 square feet.
                acres
                Greater than 23.0 acres,            1,600 square feet, mini-
                less than or equal to 36.0          mum                                       One, mini-mum                Permitted*. Up to 400 square feet.
                acres
                 Greater than 36.0 acres,           3,200 square feet, mini-
                less than or equal to 51.0          mum                                       Two, mini-mum                Permitted*. Up to 400 square feet.
                acres
                ***                                 6,400 square feet, mini-
                Greater than 51.0 acres,            mum                                       Two, mini-mum                Permitted**. Up to 800 square feet.
                less than or equal to 70.0
                acres
                 ***                                12,800 square feet, mini-
                Greater than 70.0 acres,            mum                                       Two, mini-mum                Permitted**. Up to 800 square feet.
                less than or equal to 92.0
                acres
               ‡ In the future when SMART serves Coffee Creek, Industrial Waysides may comply with the
               standards for Enhanced Transit Plazas, as follows:

               *Up to 400 square feet of the space requirement for Industrial Waysides may be satisfied by
               installation of an enhanced transit stop. An enhanced transit stop must provide weather
               protection, paved surface, and seating, as approved by SMART Transit.

               **Up to 800 square feet of the space requirement for Industrial Waysides may be satisfied by
               installation of an enhanced transit stop, provided parcel fronts on two or more Addressing
               Streets. An enhanced transit stop must provide weather protection, paved surface, and
               seating, as approved by SMART Transit.

               ***For Parcel Frontage greater than 1,500 feet, and area greater than 51.0 acres, up to 50
               percent of the space requirement for Industrial Waysides may be satisfied by restoration of
               wetlands, riparian zones, or other habitat because of  the significant passive recreation
               opportunities provided.

(.13)  Signs:

       A.     Applicability. PDI Zone requirements of Section 4.156.01 through 4.156.11 apply to the
               Coffee Creek DOD with the following modifications and adjustments.

       B.      General:

               1.      Site Frontage as described in Section 4.156.08 is the Primary Frontage.

               2.      Monument-style signs are required. Pole-style freestanding signs are not permitted.

Supp. No. 3                                                     CD4:234
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.135

              3.      Maximum area for signs on buildings is based on linear length (in feet) of the façade
                     adjacent to the Primary Frontage.
              4.      Directional and Wayfinding Signs shall be placed at the intersection of Supporting
                     Streets and Through Connections.
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 889, § 2(Exh. A), 3-18-2024; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.135.  PDI—Planned Development Industrial Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The purpose of the PDI zone is to provide opportunities for a variety of industrial
       operations and associated uses.

(.02)  The PDI Zone shall be governed by Section 4.140, Planned Development Regulations, and as
       otherwise set forth in this Code.

(.03)  Uses that are typically permitted:

       A.     Warehouses and other buildings for storage of  wholesale goods, including cold storage
              plants.
       B.      Storage and wholesale distribution of agricultural and other bulk products, provided that
              dust and odors are effectively contained within the site.

       C.     Assembly and packing of products for wholesale shipment.

       D.     Manufacturing and processing.

       E.     Motor vehicle services, or other services complementary or incidental to primary uses, and
              which support the primary uses by allowing more efficient or cost-effective operations.
       F.      Manufacturing and processing of electronics, technical instrumentation components and
              health care equipment.

       G.     Fabrication.

       H.     Office complexes—Technology.
       I.      Corporate headquarters.

       J.       Call centers.

       K.     Research and development.

       L.     Laboratories.

       M.    Repair, finishing and testing of product types manufactured or fabricated within the zone.

       N.     Industrial services.

       O.     Any use allowed in a PDC Zone, subject to the following limitations:
              1.      Service Commercial uses (defined as professional services that cater to daily customers
                     such as financial, insurance, real estate, legal, medical or dental offices) not to exceed
                     5,000 square feet of floor area in a single building, or 20,000 square feet of combined
                     floor area within a multi-building development.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:235
§ 4.135                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Office Complex Use (as defined in Section 4.001) shall not exceed 30 percent of total
                     floor area within a project site.
              3.      Retail uses, not to exceed 5,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor sales, service or
                     inventory storage area for a single building and 20,000 square feet of  indoor and
                     outdoor sales, service or inventory storage area for multiple buildings.
              4.      Combined uses under Subsections 4.135(.03)(O.)(1.) and (3.) shall not exceed a total of
                     5,000 square feet of floor area in a single building or 20,000 square feet of combined
                     floor area within a multi-building development.
       P.      Training facilities whose primary purpose is to provide training to meet industrial needs.
       Q.     Public facilities.
       R.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any permitted uses.
       S.      Temporary buildings or structures for uses incidental to construction work. Such structures
              to be removed within 30 days of completion or abandonment of the construction work.
       T.      Other similar uses, which in the judgment of the Planning Director, are consistent with the
              purpose of the PDI Zone.

(.04)  Block and access standards. The PDI zone shall be subject to the same block and access standards
       as the PDC zone, Section 4.131(.02) and (.03).

(.05)  Performance Standards. The following performance standards apply to all industrial properties
       and sites within the PDI Zone, and are intended to minimize the potential adverse impacts of
       industrial activities on the general public and on other land uses or activities. They are not intended
       to prevent conflicts between different uses or activities that may occur on the same property.
       A.     All uses and operations except storage, off-street parking, loading and unloading shall be
              confined, contained, and conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings, unless
              outdoor activities have been approved as part of Stage II, Site Design or Administrative
              Review.
       B.      Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently
              generated from equipment other than vehicles is not perceptible without instruments at any
              boundary line of the property on which the use is located.
       C.     Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in quantities as detectable at any point on
              any boundary line of the property on which the use is located shall be prohibited.
       D.     Any open storage shall comply with the provisions of Section 4.176, and this Section.
       E.     No building customarily used for night operation, such as a baker or bottling and distribu-
              tion station, shall have any opening, other than stationary windows or required fire exits,
              within 100 feet of  any residential district and any space used for loading or unloading
              commercial vehicles in connection with such an operation shall not be within 100 feet of any
              residential district.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:236
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.135

      F.     HeatandGlare:
             1.      Operationsproducingheatorglareshallbeconductedentirelywithinanenclosed
                    building.
             2.      Exteriorlightingonprivatepropertyshallbescreened,baffled,ordirectedaway
                    from adjacent residential properties. This is not intended to apply to street
                    lighting.

G.    Dangerous Substances. Any use which involves the presence, storage or handling of any
      explosive, nuclear waste product, or any other substance in a manner which would cause a
      health or safety hazard for any adjacent land use or site shall be prohibited.
H.    LiquidandSolidWastes:
      1.      Any storage of wastes which would attract insects or rodents or otherwise create a
             health hazard shall be prohibited.
      2.      Waste products which are stored outside shall be concealed from view from any
             property line by a sight-obscuring fence or planting as required in Section 4.176.
      3.      No connection with any public sewer shall be made or maintained in violation of
             applicable City or State standards.
      4.      Nowastesconveyedshallbeallowedtoorpermitted,causedtoenter,orallowedtoflow
             into any public sewer in violation of applicable City or State standards.
      5.      All drainage permitted to discharge into a street gutter, caused to enter or allowed to
             flow into any pond, lake, stream, or other natural water course shall be limited to
             surface waters or waters having similar characteristics as determined by the City,
             County, and State Department of Environmental Quality.
      6.      All operations shall be conducted in conformance with the City's standards and
             ordinances applying to sanitary and storm sewer discharges.

I.     Noise. Noise generated by the use, with the exception of traffic noises from automobiles,
      trucks,andtrains,shallnotviolateanyapplicablestandardsadoptedbytheOregonDepart-
      ment of Environmental Quality and W.C. 6.204 governing noise control in the same or
      similar locations.

J.     ElectricalDisturbances.ExceptforelectricalfacilitieswhereintheCityispreemptedbyother
      governmental entities, electrical disturbances generated by uses within the PDI zone which
      interfere with the normal operation of equipment or instruments within the PDI Zone are
      prohibited.Electricaldisturbanceswhichroutinelycauseinterferencewithnormalactivityin
      abutting residential use areas are also prohibited.

K.    DischargeStandards.Thereshallbenoemissionof smoke,fallout,flyash,dust,vapor,gases,
      orotherformsof airpollutionthatmaycauseanuisanceorinjurytohuman,plant,oranimal
      life, or to property. Plans of construction and operation shall be subject to the recommen-
      dations and regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality. All measure-
      mentsof airpollutionshallbebytheproceduresandwithequipmentapprovedbytheState
      Department of Environmental Quality or equivalent and acceptable methods of measure-

                                                CD4:237
§ 4.135                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             mentapprovedbytheCity.Personsresponsibleforasuspectedsourceof airpollutionupon
             the request of the City shall provide quantitative and qualitative information regarding the
             discharge that will adequately and accurately describe operation conditions.

      L.     Open burning is prohibited.
      M.   Storage:
             1.      Outdoor storage must be maintained in an orderly manner at all times.
             2.      Outdoor storage area shall be gravel surface or better and shall be suitable for the
                    materials being handled and stored. If a gravel surface is not sufficient to meet the
                    performance standards for the use, the area shall be suitably paved.
             3.      Anyopenstoragethatwouldotherwisebevisibleatthepropertylineshallbeconcealed
                    from view at the abutting property line by a sight obscuring fence or planting not less
                    than six feet in height.
      N.    Landscaping:
             1.      Unused property, or property designated for expansion or other future use, shall be
                    landscapedandmaintainedasapprovedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard.Landscap-
                    ing for unused property disturbed during construction shall include such things as
                    plantings of ornamental shrubs, lawns, native plants, and mowed, seeded fieldgrass.
             2.      Contiguousunusedareasof undisturbedfieldgrassmaybemaintainedintheirexisting
                    state. Large stands of invasive weeds such as Himalayan blackberries, English ivy,
                    cherry Laurel, reed canary grass or other identified invasive plants shall be removed
                    and/or mowed at least annually to reduce fire hazard. These unused areas, located
                    within a phased development project or a future expansion cannot be included in the
                    area calculated to meet the landscape requirements for the initial phase(s) of  the
                    development.
             3.      Unused property shall not be left with disturbed soils that are subject to siltation and
                    erosion.Anydisturbedsoilshallbeseededforcompleteerosioncovergerminationand
                    shall be subject to applicable erosion control standards.

(.06)  OtherStandards:

      A.    MinimumIndividualLotSize. No limit save and except as shall be consistent with the other
             provisions of this Code (e.g., landscaping, parking, etc.).

      B.    Maximum Lot Coverage. No limit save and except as shall be consistent with the other
             provisions of this Code (e.g., landscaping, parking, etc.).

      C.    FrontYardSetback. Thirty (30) feet. Structures on corner or through lots shall observe the
             minimum front yard setback on both streets. Setbacks shall also be maintained from the
             planned rights-of-way shown on any adopted City street plan.

      D.    Rear and Side Yard Setback. Thirty (30) feet. Structures on corner or through lots shall
             observe the minimum rear and side yard setbacks on both streets. Setbacks shall also be
             maintained from the planned rights-of-way shown on any adopted City street plan.

                                                        CD4:238
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.135.5

      E.     No setback is required when side or rear yards abut on a railroad siding.
      F.      Corner Vision: Corner lots shall have no sight obstruction to exceed the vision clearance
             standards of Section 4.177.
      G.     Off-Street Parking and Loading: As provided in Section 4.155.

      H.     Signs: As provided in Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.
(Ord. No. 631, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.135.5. Planned Development Industrial—Regionally Significant Industrial Area.

(.01)  Purpose.Thepurposeof thePDI-RSIAZoneistoprovideopportunitiesforregionallysignificant
      industrialoperationsalongwithalimitedandappropriaterangeof relatedandcompatibleuses;to
      provide the flexibility to accommodate the changing nature of industrial employment centers, to
      protect industrially zoned lands for industrial uses, primarily in those areas near significant
      transportation facilities for the movement of  freight and to facilitate the redevelopment of
      under-utilized industrial sites.

(.02)  ThePDI-RSIAZoneshallbegovernedbySection4.140,PlannedDevelopmentRegulations,and
      as otherwise set forth in this Code.

(.03)  Usesthataretypicallypermitted:
      A.     Wholesale houses, storage units, and warehouses.

      B.      Laboratories, storage buildings, warehouses, and cold storage plants.
      C.     Assembly of electrical equipment, including the manufacture of small parts.
      D.     Thelightmanufacturing,simplecompoundingorprocessingpackaging,assemblingand/or
             treatment of products, cosmetics, drugs, and food products, unless such use is inconsistent
             with air pollution, excess noise, or water pollution standards.
      E.     Office Complexes-Technology (as defined in Section 4.001).
      F.      Experimental, film or testing laboratories.

      G.     Storage and distribution of  grain, livestock feed, provided dust and smell is effectively
             controlled.
      H.     Motor vehicle service facilities complementary or incidental to permitted uses.
      I.      AnyuseallowedinaPDCZoneoranyotherlightindustrialusesprovidedthatanysuchuse
             is compatible with industrial use and is planned and developed in a manner consistent with
             thepurposesandobjectivesof Sections4.130to4.140andissubjecttothefollowingcriteria:
             1.      ServiceCommercial(definedasprofessionalservicesthatcatertodailycustomerssuch
                    as financial, insurance, real estate, legal, medical or dental offices) shall not exceed
                    3,000squarefeetof floorspaceinasinglebuildingor20,000squarefeetof combined
                    floor area within a multiple building development.
             2.      OfficeUse(asdefinedinSection4.001)shallnotexceed20percentof totalfloorarea
                    within a project site.

                                                       CD4:239
§ 4.135.5                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Retail uses not to exceed 3,000 square feet of indoor and outdoor sales, service, or
                    inventorystorageareaforasinglebuildingor20,000squarefeetof indoorandoutdoor
                    sales, service or inventory storage area for multiple buildings.
             4.      Combined uses under I.1 and 3. above shall not exceed a total of 3,000 square feet of
                    floor area in a single building or 20,000 square feet of combined floor area within a
                    multi-building development.

      J.       Residential uses shall not exceed ten percent of total floor area.

      K.     Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of  the aforesaid
             principal permitted uses.

      L.     Temporarybuildingsorstructuresforusesincidentaltoconstructionwork,whichbuildings
             orstructuresshallberemoveduponcompletionorabandonmentof theconstructionwork.

      M.    Expansion of a building, structure or use approved prior to October 25, 2004 of up to 20
             percent additional floor area and/or ten percent additional land area.

      N.     Other similar uses which in the judgment of the Planning Director are consistent with the
             purpose of the PDI-RSIA Zone.

(.04)  Prohibiteduses:

      A.     Retailoperationsexceeding3,000squarefeetof areaforsales,serviceareaorstorageareafor
             retailinventoryinasinglebuilding,or20,000squarefeetof sales,serviceorstorageareafor
             multiplebuildings,excepttrainingfacilitieswhoseprimarypurposeistoprovidetrainingto
             meet industrial needs.

      B.      AnyuseoractivitythatviolatestheperformancestandardsspecifiedinSubsection4.135.5(.06),
             below.

(.05)  BlockandAccessStandards. The PDI-RSIA Zone shall be subject to:

      A.     The same block and access standards as the PDC Zone [Section 4.131(.02) and (.03)] for
             properties located outside of the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District; or

      B.      TheaccessandblocksizestandardsinSection4.134forthosepropertieslocatedwithinthe
             Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.

(.06)  Performance Standards. The following performance standards apply to all industrial properties
      andsiteswithinthePDI-RSIAZone,andareintendedtominimizethepotentialadverseimpacts
      of industrial activities on the general public and on other land uses or activities. They are not
      intended to prevent conflicts between different uses or activities that may occur on the same
      property or site.

      A.     All uses and operations except storage, off-street parking, loading and unloading shall be
             confined, contained and conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings, unless
             outdoor activities have been approved as part of Stage II, Site Design or Administrative
             Review.

                                                        CD4:240
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.135.5

B.    Vibration:Everyuseshallbesooperatedthatthegroundvibrationinherentlyandrecurrently
      generatedfromequipmentotherthanvehiclesisnotperceptiblewithoutinstrumentsatany
      boundary line of the property or site on which the use is located.

C.     Emissionof odorousgasesorotherodorousmatterinquantitiesdetectableatanytimeand
      at any point on any boundary line of the property or site on which the use is located are
      prohibited.

D.     Any open storage shall comply with the provisions of Section 4.176 and this Section.

E.     Nobuildingcustomarilyusedfornightoperation,suchasabakery,bottlinganddistribution
      plantorothersimilaruse,shallhaveanyopening,otherthanstationarywindowsorrequired
      fire exits, within 100 feet of  any residential district and any space used for loading or
      unloadingcommercialvehiclesinconnectionwithsuchanoperationshallnotbewithin100
      feet of any residential district.

F.     HeatandGlare:

      1.      Operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
             building.

      2.      Exterior lighting on private property shall be screened, baffled, or otherwise directed
             away from adjacent residential properties. This is not intended to apply to street
             lighting.

G.    Dangerous Substances: Any use which involves the presence, storage or handling of any
      explosive, nuclear waste product or any other substance in a manner which would cause a
      health or safety hazard on any adjacent land use or site shall be prohibited.

H.    LiquidandSolidWastes:

      1.      Any storage of wastes which would attract rodents or insects or otherwise create a
             health hazard shall be prohibited.

      2.      Waste products which are stored outside shall be concealed from view from any
             property line by a sight-obscuring fence or planting as required by Section 4.176.

      3.      No connection with any public sewer shall be made or maintained in violation of
             applicable City or State standards.

      4.      Nowastesconveyedshallbeallowedtoorpermitted,causedtoenter,orallowedtoflow
             into any public sewer in violation of applicable City or State standards.

      5.      All drainage permitted to discharge into a street gutter, caused to enter or allowed to
             flowintoanypond,lake,streamorothernaturalwatercourseshallbelimitedtosurface
             watersorwatershavingsimilarcharacteristicsasdeterminedbytheCity,County,and
             State Department of Environmental Quality.

      6.      All operations shall be conducted in conformance with the City's standards and
             ordinances applying to sanitary and storm sewer discharges.

                                                CD4:241
§ 4.135.5                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

      I.     Noise:Noisegeneratedbytheuse,withtheexceptionof trafficusesfromautomobiles,trucks
             andtrains,shallnotviolateanyapplicablestandardsadoptedbytheOregonDepartmentof
             Environmental Quality and W.C. 6.204 governing noise control in the same or similar
             locations. [Amended by Ord. 631, 7-16-2007]

      J.     ElectricalDisturbances.ExceptforelectricalfacilitieswhereintheCityispre-emptedbyother
             governmentalentities,electricaldisturbancesgeneratedbyuseswithinthePDI-RSIAZone
             which interfere with the normal operation of equipment or instruments within the PDI-
             RSIA Zone are prohibited. Electrical disturbances which routinely cause interference with
             normal activity in abutting residential uses are also prohibited.

      K.    DischargeStandards.Thereshallbenoemissionof smoke,fallout,flyash,dust,vapors,gases
             orotherformsof airpollutionthatmaycauseanuisanceorinjurytohuman,plantoranimal
             life or to property. Plans for construction and operation shall be subject to the recommen-
             dations and regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality. All measure-
             mentsof airpollutionshallbebytheproceduresandwithequipmentapprovedbytheState
             Department of Environmental Quality or equivalent and acceptable methods of measure-
             mentapprovedbytheCity.Personsresponsibleforasuspectedsourceof airpollutionupon
             request of the City shall provide quantitative and qualitative information regarding the
             discharge that will adequately and accurately describe operation conditions.

      L.     Open burning is prohibited.

      M.   Storage.

             1.      Outdoor storage must be maintained in an orderly manner at all times.
             2.      Outdoor storage areas shall be gravel surfaced or better and shall be sufficient for the
                    materials being handled and stored. If a gravel surface is not sufficient to meet the
                    performance standards for the use, the area shall be suitably paved.
             3.      Anyopenstoragethatwouldotherwisebevisibleatthepropertylineshallbeconcealed
                    from view at the abutting property line by a sight obscuring fence or planting not less
                    than six feet in height.

      N.    Landscaping.

             1.      Unused property, or property designated for expansion or other future use shall be
                    landscapedandmaintainedasapprovedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard.Landscap-
                    ing for unused property disturbed during construction shall include such materials as
                    plantings of ornamental shrubs, lawns, native plants, and mowed, seeded fieldgrass.

             2.      Contiguousunusedareasof undisturbedfieldgrassmaybemaintainedintheirexisting
                    state.Largestandsof invasiveweedssuchasHimalayanblackberry,Englishivy,cherry
                    laurel, reed canary grass or other identified invasive species shall be removed and/or
                    mowed at least annually to reduce fire hazard. These unused areas, located with a
                    phased development project or a future expansion cannot be included in the area
                    calculated to meet the landscape requirements for the initial phase(s) of the develop-
                    ment.

                                                       CD4:242
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.135.5

             3.      Unused property shall not be left with disturbed soils that are subject to siltation and
                    erosion.Anydisturbedsoilshallbeseededforcompleteerosioncovergerminationand
                    shall be subject to applicable erosion control standards.

(.07)  OtherStandards:

      A.    LotSize:
             1.      Parcelslessthan50acresinsizeatthetimeof adoptionof thisamendedSection:Land
                    divisionsmayoccurinconformancewithanapprovedMasterPlanconsistentwiththe
                    requirements of this section. No lot size limit, save and except as shall be consistent
                    with the other provisions of this Code.
             2.      Parcels50acresorgreaterinsizeexistingonOctober25,2004maybedividedintoany
                    number of parcels or lots pursuant to an approved Master Plan provided that at least
                    onelotorparcelof atleast50acresinsizeremains.Providedfurtherhowever,atleast
                    40percentof thelotorparcelsocreatedhasbeendevelopedorplannedforindustrial
                    uses and associated accessory uses and no portion has been developed or planned for
                    the uses listed in Section 4.135.5(03)(I.)(1.) through (3).
             3.      Uses not subject to the foregoing lot size provisions:
                    a.      Public facilities and services
                    b.      Separation of a lot or parcel in order to protect a natural resource, to provide a
                          publicamenity,ortoimplementaremediationplanforasiteidentifiedbyDEQ
                          pursuant to ORS 465.225.
                    c.      Separationof alotorparcelcontaininganonconformingusefromtheremainder
                          of the site in order to improve the utility of the remainder site for the intended
                          industrial uses
                    d.      Separationforthepurposesof financingwhenthenewlotorparcelisconsistent
                          with the approved Master Plan.
                    e.      Division of lots or parcels consistent with a Master Plan approved by the City
                          prior to July 1, 2004.

      B.    Maximum Lot Coverage. No limit save and except as shall be consistent with the other
             provisions of this Code.

      C.    Front Yard Setback. Thirty feet. Except as otherwise provided for properties within the
             Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District, structures on corner or through lots shall
             observe the minimum front yard setback on both streets. Setbacks shall also be maintained
             from the planned rights-of-way shown on any adopted City street plan.

      D.    RearandSideYardSetback.Thirtyfeet.Exceptasotherwiseprovidedforpropertieswithin
             the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District, structures on corner or through lots
             shallobservetheminimumrearandsideyardsetbackonbothstreets.Setbacksshallalsobe
             maintained from the planned rights-of-way shown on any adopted City street plan.

      E.     No setback is required when rear or side yards abut a railroad siding.

                                                       CD4:243
§ 4.135.5                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

       F.     Corner Vision. Corner lots shall have no lot obstruction to exceed the vision clearance
              standards of Section 4.177.
       G.    Off-streetParkingandLoading. As required in Section 4.155.
       H.    Signs. As required in Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.
(Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.136. PF—Public Facility Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The PF zone is intended to be applied to existing public lands and facilities; including
       quasi-public lands and facilities which serve and benefit the community and its citizens. Typical
       usespermittedinthePFZoneareschools,churches,publicbuildings,hospitals,parksandpublic
       utilities. Not all of the uses permitted in this zone are expected to be publicly owned.

(.02)  UsesPermittedOutright:
       A.     Municipal or Governmental Service Building.
       B.      Churches.
       C.     Hospital.
       D.     Marina, public.
       E.     Recreational and community buildings and grounds, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis
              courts and similar recreational uses.

       F.      Parking facilities.
       G.     Public utilities and buildings.
       H.     Library.
       I.      Trails and pathways.
       J.       Parks.

       K.     Public Schools.
       L.     Kindergartens or day care centers.
       M.    Accessory uses.

(.03)  UsessubjecttoaConditionalUse:
       A.     Picnic grounds.

       B.      Sewerage Treatment Plant.
       C.     Water treatment plant and storage reservoir.
       D.     Storage yard, stockpiles and materials.
       E.     Zoo.
       F.      Cemetery.

       G.     Private or Parochial School, College or University.

                                                          CD4:244
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.136.5

      H.     Military bases or offices, including armories.

(.04)  DimensionalStandards:

      A.    MinimumLotSize:One(l)AcreTheminimumlotareamaybereduceduponafindingthat
             the resulting parcel is compatible with the adjoining property in that it does not impair the
             development of any adjoining property, does not adversely affect the value of adjoining
             property, and does not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.

      B.    Minimumfrontandrearyardsetbacks: Thirty feet. Minimum sideyard setback: Ten feet.

      C.    Minimumstreetfrontage: Seventy-five feet.

      D.    Maximumheight: Thirty five feet.

(.05)  Off-StreetParkingRequirements: As provided in Section 4.155.

(.06)  Signs: As provided in Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

(.07)  CornerVision: As provided in Section 4.176.

(.08)  SpecialRegulations:

      A.     All principal and conditional uses shall be subject to Section 4.400 through 4.450 (Site
             Design Review) of the Wilsonville Code.

      B.      As part of either a permitted or conditional use, the Planning Commission may review and
             approve a Master Plan for an entire development or area subject to Section 4.140 (Planned
             DevelopmentRegulations)of theWilsonvilleCode.Approvalof aMasterPlanwouldallow
             allusesprovidedintheMasterPlanwithoutfurtherreview.Minorchangeswhichdonothave
             off-site impact or increase visitor capacity may be reviewed by the Planning Director.

      C.     Prisons, other than minimum-security mental institutions, are hereby prohibited.

      D.     Development within Public Facility zones shall comply with applicable provisions of ad-
             opted legislative master plans.

(.09)  Blockandaccessstandards:ThePFzoneshallbesubjecttothesameblockandaccessstandards
      as the PDC zone, Section 4.131(.03).
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 806, 7-17-2017)

Section  4.136.5. PF-C—Public Facility—Corrections Zone.

(.01)  Purpose.ThePF-Czoneisintendedtobeappliedtolandsthathavebeen,orarebeing,acquired
      for use and development of corrections facilities and related accessory uses and facilities.

(.02)  UsesPermittedOutright:

      A.     MunicipalorGovernmentalServiceBuilding,subjecttothesitedesignreviewstandardsof
             Section 4.400.

      B.      Prisonsandothercorrectionalfacilities,subjecttothesitedesignreviewstandardsof Section
             4.400.

                                                       CD4:245
§ 4.136.5                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  Usessubjecttoathegrantingof aConditionalUsePermit:
      A.     Public parks, trails, or pathways.
      B.      Water treatment plant and storage reservoir.

      C.     Military bases or offices, including armories.

(.04)  DimensionalStandards:
      A.    MinimumLotSize:OneAcre.Theminimumlotareamaybereduceduponafindingthatthe
             resulting parcel is compatible with the adjoining property in that it does not impair the
             development of any adjoining property, does not adversely affect the value of adjoining
             property, and does not adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare.
      B.    Minimumbuildingsetbacks,allsides: One hundred feet.

      C.    Maximumheight: Forty-five feet.

(.05)  Off-StreetParkingRequirements. As provided in Section 4.155.

(.06)  Signs. As provided in Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11.

(.07)  CornerVision As provided in Section 4.177.

(.08)  SpecialRegulations:

      A.     All principal and conditional uses shall be subject to Section 4.400 through 4.450 (Site
             Design Review) of the Wilsonville Code.
      B.      Aspartof eitherapermittedorconditionaluse,theDevelopmentReviewBoardmayreview
             and approve a Master Plan for an entire development or area subject to Section 4.140
             (Planned Development Regulations) of the Wilsonville Code. Approval of a Master Plan
             would allow all uses provided in the Master Plan without further review. Minor changes
             which do not have off-site impact or increase visitor capacity may be reviewed by the
             Planning Director.

(.09)  Blockstandards: None required.
(Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012)

Section  4.137. Solar Access for New Residential Development.

(.01)  SolarAccess(S)OverlayZone:

      A.     An"S"(solaraccess)OverlayZoneisherebycreated.Itmaybeusedinconjunctionwithany
             underlyingresidentialbasezone(e.g.,PDR-S,R-S,etc.)tofurtherrefineland-useregulations
             in the interest of protecting solar access.
      B.      TheCityCouncilmay,throughthezonechangeprocess,applythe"S"OverlayZonetoany
             areaordevelopmentwhereprotectinglong-termsolaraccessisof particularconcern,andis
             specifically requested by the developer or owner of the site.

      C.     The Solar Access (S) Overlay Zone shall not be applied to existing development unless
             substantial redevelopment is anticipated in the near future.

                                                       CD4:246
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.137

(.02)  Purpose. The purposes of Section 4.137 are to ensure that land is divided or developed so that
      structurescanbeorientedtomaximizesolaraccessandtominimizeshadeonadjoiningproperties
      from structures and trees. The intent of applying the "S" overlay zone is not to create a loop-hole
      which will allow a developer to clear-cut a site.

(.03)  Applicability. The solar design standard in Section 4.137(.05) shall apply to applications for a
      development to create lots or building sites in those base zones that have an "S" (solar access)
      Overlay Zone.

(.04)  Exemptions or Adjustments. An applicant may adjust or be exempt from the provisions of this
      section to the extent the Development Review Board finds that the applicant has shown one or
      moreof theconditionslistedinSections4.137(.06)and(.07)exist,andexemptionsoradjustments
      provided for therein are warranted.

(.05)  DesignStandard.Atleast80percentof thelotsorbuildingsitesinadevelopmentsubjecttothe"S"
      overlayzoneshallcomplywithoneormoreof theoptionsisthissectionprovided,however,thata
      developmentmay,butisnotrequiredto,usetheoptionsinsubsections4.137(.05)(B)or4.137(.05)(C)
      to comply with Section 4.137(.05).

      A.     BasicRequirement(seeFigure10:SolarLotOption1:BasicRequirements).Alotcomplies
             with Section 4.137(.05) if it:

             1.      Has a north-south dimension of 90 feet or more; and

             2.      Has a front lot line that is oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis.

      B.      Protected Solar Building Line Option (see Figure 11: Solar Lot Option 2: Protected Solar
             Building Line). In the alternative, a lot complies with Section 4.137(.05) if a solar building
             line is used to protect solar access as follows:

             1.      A protected solar building line is designated on the subdivision or partition plat or in
                    documents recorded with the plat; and

             2.      Theprotectedsolarbuildinglineisorientedwithin30degreesof atrueeast-westaxis;
                    and

             3.      Thereisatleast70feetbetweentheprotectedsolarbuildinglineandthemiddleof the
                    north-southdimensionof thelottothesouth,measuredalongalineperpendicularto
                    the protected solar building line; and

             4.      Thereisatleast45feetbetweentheprotectedsolarbuildinglineandthenorthernedge
                    of the buildable area of the lot, or habitable structures are situated so that at least 80
                    percent of their south-facing wall will not be shaded by structures or vegetation.

      C.    PerformanceOption. In the alternative, a lot complies with Section 4.137(.05) if:

             1.      Habitablestructuresbuiltonthatlotwillhavetheirlongaxisorientedwithin30degrees
                    of atrueeast-westaxis,andatleast80percentof theirgroundfloorsouthwallwillbe
                    protected from shade by structures and trees using appropriate deed restrictions; or

                                                       CD4:247
§ 4.137                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      Habitablestructuresbuiltonthatlotwillhaveatleast32percentof theirglazingandat
                    least500squarefeetof theirroof areawithin30degreeseastorwestof truesouth,and
                    that glazing and roof areas are protected from shade by structures and trees using
                    appropriate deed restrictions.

(.06)  Exemptions from Design Standard. A development is exempt or partially exempt from Section
      4.137(.05)if theDevelopmentReviewBoardfindsthattheapplicanthasshownthatoneormore
      of the following conditions apply to the site. If a partial exemption is granted for a portion of a
      given development, the remainder of the development shall comply with Section 4.137(.05).

      A.    Slopes.Thesite,oraportionof thesiteforwhichtheexemptionissought,issloped20percent
             or more in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of  true south, based on a
             topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor, USGS data, or other officially
             recognized topographic information.

      B.    Off-siteshade.Thesite,oraportionof thesiteforwhichtheexemptionissought,iswithinthe
             shadow pattern of off-site features, such as but not limited to structures, topography, or
             vegetation, which will remain after development occurs on the site from which the shade is
             originating.

             1.      Shade from an existing or approved off-site dwelling in a residential zone, and from
                    topographic features, is assumed to remain after development of the site.

             2.      Shadefromanoff-sitestructureinazoneotherthanaresidentialzoneisassumedtobe
                    the shadow pattern of the existing or approved development thereon or the shadow
                    pattern that would result from the largest structure allowed at the closest setback on
                    adjoining land, whether or not that structure now exists.

             3.      Shadefromoff-sitevegetationisassumedtoremainafterdevelopmentof thesiteif:the
                    treesthatcauseshadearesituatedinarequiredsetbackortheyarepartof adeveloped
                    area, public park, or are a part of an approved development or Significant Resource
                    OverlayZone;ortheyareinorseparatedfromthedevelopableremainderof aparcelby
                    anundevelopableareaorfeature;ortheyarepartof landscapingrequiredpursuantto
                    the Wilsonville Code.

             4.      Shadefromotheroff-sitesourcesisassumedtobeshadethatexistsorthatwillbecast
                    by development for which applicable local permits have been approved on the date a
                    complete application for the development is filed.

      C.    On-siteshade. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is requested, is:

      1.      Within the shadow pattern of on-site features such as, but not limited to structures and
             topography which will remain after the development occurs; or

      2.      Contains trees at least 30 feet tall and more than six inches in diameter measured four feet
             abovethegroundwhichhaveacrowncoveroveratleast80percentof thesite,ortherelevant
             portionof thesite.Theapplicantcanshowsuchcrowncoverexistsusingascaledsurveyor
             an aerial photograph. If granted, the exemption shall be approved subject to the condition

                                                       CD4:248
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.137

             that the applicant preserve at least 50 percent of the crown cover that causes the shade that
             warrantstheexemption.Theapplicantshallfileanoteontheplatorotherdocumentsinthe
             Office of the County Recorder binding the applicant to comply with this requirement.

      D.    Completionofphasedsubdivision.Thesiteispartof aphasedsubdivision,noneof whichwas
             subject to Section 4.137, and the site and the remainder of the unplatted portion of the
             phased subdivision contain no more than 20 percent of  the lots in all phases of  the
             subdivision.

(.07)  AdjustmentstoDesignStandard. The Development Review Board shall reduce the percentage of
      lots that must comply with Section 4.137(.05) to the minimum extent necessary if it finds the
      applicant has shown it would cause or is subject to one or more of the following conditions.

      A.    Adverseimpactsondensity,cost,oramenities:

             1.      If thedesignstandardinSection4.137(.05)(A)isapplied,eithertheresultingdensityis
                    less than that proposed, or on-site development costs (e.g., grading, water, storm
                    drainage and sanitary systems, and road) and solar related off-site development costs
                    areatleastfivepercentmoreperlotthanif thestandardisnotapplied.Thefollowing
                    conditions, among others, could constrain the design of a development in such a way
                    that compliance with Section 4.137(.05)(A) would reduce density or increase per lot
                    costs in this manner. The applicant shall show which, if any, of these or other similar
                    site characteristics apply in an application for a development.

                    a.      Theportionof thesiteforwhichtheadjustmentissoughthasanaturalgradethat
                           isslopedtenpercentormoreandisorientedgreaterthan45degreeseastorwest
                           of true south based on a topographic survey of the site by a professional land
                           surveyor, USGS data, or other officially recognized topographic information.

                    b.      Thereisasignificantnaturalfeatureonthesite,identifiedassuchinthecompre-
                           hensive plan or development code, that prevents given streets, private drives, or
                           lots from being oriented for solar access, and it will exist after the site is
                           developed.

                    c.      Existing road patterns must be continued throughout the site or must terminate
                           on-site to comply with applicable road standards or public road plans in a way
                           that prevents given streets, private drives, or lots in the development from being
                           oriented for solar access.

                    d.      Anexistingpubliceasementorright-of-waypreventsgivenstreets,privatedrives,
                           or lots in the development from being oriented for solar access.

             2.      If  the design standard in Section 4.137(.05)(A) applies to given lot(s), significant
                    developmentamenitiesthatwouldotherwisebenefitthelot(s)willbelostorimpaired.
                    Evidence that a significant diminution in the market value of the lot(s) would result
                    from having the lot(s) comply with Section 4.137(.05)(A) is relevant to whether a
                    significant development amenity is lost or impaired.

                                                       CD4:249
§ 4.137                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      B.      Impactsof existingshade.Theshadowpatternfromtreescoveratleast80percentof thelot
             and at least 50 percent of the shadow pattern will remain after development of the lot. The
             applicantshallshowtheshadowpatternusingascaledsurveyof treesonthesiteorusingan
             aerial photograph.

             1.      Shadefromtreesisassumedtoremainif:thetreesaresituatedinarequiredsetbackor
                    they are part of an existing or proposed park, open space, or recreational amenity; or
                    theyareseparatedfromthedevelopableremainderof theirparcelbyanundevelopable
                    areaorfeature;ortheyarepartof landscapingrequiredpursuanttoWilsonvilleCode;
                    and they do not need to be removed for a driveway or other development.

             2.      Also,totheextenttheshadeiscausedbyon-sitetreesoroff-sitetreesonlandownedby
                    theapplicant,suchshadeisassumedtoremainif awrittendescriptionof theretained
                    treescausingtheshadeof theaffectedlotsistitledwiththepertinentlandpartitionor
                    subdivision plat.

(.08)  Protectionfromfutureshade.StructuresandvegetationmustcomplywiththeSolarBalancePoint
      Standards[WCsection4.137.2]onalllotsinadevelopmentsubjecttotheSolarOverlayZonefor
      NewDevelopment,includinglotsforwhichexemptionsoradjustmentstoSection4.137havebeen
      granted.Theapplicantshallfileanoteontheplatorotherdocumentsintheofficeof theCounty
      Recorder binding the applicant and subsequent purchasers to comply with the future shade
      protection standards in Section 4.137(.08).

(.09)  Application. An application for approval of a development subject to this section shall include:

      A.     Maps and text sufficient to show that the development complies with the solar design
             standard of Section 4.137(.05), except for lots for which an exemption or adjustment from
             Section 4.137(.05) is requested, including at least:

             1.      The north-south lot dimension and front lot line orientation of each proposed lot.

             2.      Protected solar building lines and relevant building site restrictions, if applicable.

             3.      For the purpose of identifying trees exempt from Section 4.137(.08), a map showing
                    existingtreesatleast30feettallandoversixinchesdiameteratapointfourfeetabove
                    grade, indicating their height, diameter and species, and stating that they are to be
                    retained and are exempt.

             4.      Copies of all private restrictions relating to solar access.

      B.      If anexemptionoradjustmenttoSection4.137(.05)isrequested,mapsandtextsufficientto
             show that given lots or areas in the development comply with the standards for such an
             exemption or adjustment in Sections 4.137(.06) or (.07), respectively.

(.10)  Process. The general application procedures listed in Sections 4.008 through 4.024 apply to this
      section.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

                                                       CD4:250
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.137.2

Section  4.137.2. Solar Balance Point Standards.

(.01)  Purpose. The purposes of these standards are to promote the use of solar energy, to minimize
      shadingof structuresbyotherstructures,and,whereapplicable,tominimizeshadingof structures
      by trees. Decisions related to these standards are intended to be ministerial.

(.02)  Applicability.Thissectionappliestoanapplicationforabuildingpermitforallstructuresinan"S"
      (solar access) Overlay Zone. In addition, vegetation planted or growing on lots subject to the
      provisions of Section 4.137(.08)(Protection from future shade) shall comply with the shade point
      height standards as provided in Sections 4.137.2(.05) and (.06).

(.03)  ExemptionsorAdjustments.Anapplicantmayadjustorbeexemptfromtheprovisionsof Section
      4.137.2 to the extent the Development Review Board finds the applicant has shown that one or
      moreof theconditionslistedinsections4.137.2(.06)or(.07)exists,andexemptionsoradjustments
      provided for there are warranted.

(.04)  SolarSitePlanrequired.Anapplicantforabuildingpermitforastructuresubjecttothissection
      shall submit a site plan that shows:
      A.     The maximum shade point height allowed under Section 4.137.2(.05);
      B.      If the maximum shade point height is adjusted pursuant to Section 4.137.2(.05)(A)(2), the
             average elevation of the rear property line;
      C.     Thelocationof theshadepoint,itsheightrelativetotheaverageelevationof thefrontlotline
             ortheelevationatthemidpointof thefrontlotline,anditsorientationrelativetotruesouth;
             and, if applicable,

      D.     The solar balance point for the structure as provided in Section 4.137.2(.09).

(.05)  MaximumShadePointHeightStandard. The height of the shade point shall comply with either
      subsection A or B, below.

      A.    BasicRequirement:
             1.      Theheightof theshadepointshallbelessthanorequaltotheheightspecifiedinTable
                    2 or computed using the following formula. The height of the shade point shall be
                    measuredfromtheshadepointtoeithertheaverageelevationatthefrontlotlineorthe
                    elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If necessary, interpolate between the
                    five-foot dimensions listed in Table 2.
                                                       H = (2 × SRL) - N + 150
                                                                     5
                          Where:
                          H=themaximumallowedheightof theshadepoint(seeFigures5:Heightof the
                          Shade Point of the Structure and Figure 6: Shade Point Height);
                          SRL = shade reduction line (the distance between the shade point and the
                          northern lot line, (see Figure 7 Shade Reduction Line); and
                          N = The north-south lot dimension, provided that a north-south lot dimension
                          more than 90 feet shall use a value of 90 feet for this section.

                                                       CD4:251
§ 4.137.2                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

                2.      Provided, the maximum allowed height of the shade point may be increased one foot
                        abovetheamountcalculatedusingtheformulaorTable2foreachfootthattheaverage
                        grade at the rear property line exceeds the average grade at the front property line.

                              TABLE 2: MAXIMUM PERMITTED SHADE POINT HEIGHT (In Feet)
                                                          North-South lot dimension (in feet)
             Distance        to     100+    95       90       85       80       75       70       65       60       55       50       45       40
             ShadeReduction
             Linefromnorth-
             ern  lot  line  (in
             feet)
                      70                40       40       40       41       42       43       44
                      65                38       38       38       39       40       41       42       43
                      60                36       36       36       37       38       39       40       41       42
                      55                34       34       34       35       36       37       38       39       40       41
                      50                32       32       32       33       34       35       36       37       38       39       40
                      45                30       30       30       31       32       33       34       35       36       37       38       39
                      40                28       28       28       29       30       31       32       33       34       35       36       37       38
                      35                26       26       26       27       28       29       30       31       32       33       34       35       36
                      30                24       24       24       25       26       27       28       29       30       31       32       33       34
                      25                22       22       22       23       24       25       26       27        2        29       30       31       32
                      20                20       20       20       21       22       23       24       25       26       27       28       29       30
                      15                18       18       18       19       20       21       22       23       24       25       26       27       28
                      10                16       16       16       17       18       19       20       21       22       23       24       25       26
                       5                 14       14       14       15       16       17       18       19       20       21       22       23       24
        B.    PerformanceOption. The proposed structure, or applicable vegetation, will shade not more
                than 20 percent of  the south-facing glazing of  existing habitable structure(s), or, where
                applicable,theproposedstructureorvegetationcomplywithSection4.137(.05)(B)or(C)of
                Section4.137.If Section4.137(.05)(B),ProtectedSolarBuildingLine,isused,treesandthe
                shade point of structures shall be set back from the protected solar building line two and
                one-half  feet for every one foot of  height of  the structure or of  the mature height of
                vegetation over two feet.

(.06)  Exemption from the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The Development Review Board
        shall exempt a proposed structure or vegetation from Sections 4.137.2(.04) and (.05) if  the
        applicantshowsthatoneormoreof theconditionsinthissectionexist,basedonplotplansorplats,
        corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, suncharts or photographs, or
        other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

        A.    Exempt Lot. When created, the lot was subject to Section 4.137 (Solar Access for New
                Development) and was not subject to the provisions of Section 4.137(.08).

        B.    Pre-existingshade. The structure or applicable vegetation will shade an area that is already
                shaded by one or more of the following:

                1.      An existing or approved building or structure;

                2.      A topographic feature; or

                                                                    CD4:252
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.137.2

             3.      A tree that will remain after development of the site. It is assumed a tree will remain
                    afterdevelopmentif it:issituatedinabuildingsetbackrequiredbyWilsonvilleCode;
                    ispartof adevelopedareaorlandscapingrequiredbyWilsonvilleCode;apublicpark
                    or landscape strip, or are a part of an approved development or Significant Resource
                    Overlay Zone; is in or separated from the developable remainder of a parcel by an
                    undevelopableareaorfeature;orisontheapplicant'spropertyandnotaffectedbythe
                    development.Adulyexecutedcovenantalsocanbeusedtopreservetreescausingsuch
                    shade.

      C.    Slope. The site has an average slope that exceeds 20 percent in a direction greater than 45
             degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional
             land surveyor, USGS data, or other officially recognized topographic information.

      D.    Insignificantbenefit.Theproposedstructureorvegetationshadesonormoreof thefollow-
             ing:

             1.      An undevelopable area;

             2.      The wall of an unheated space, such as a typical garage;

             3.      Less than 20 square feet of south-facing glazing; or

             4.      An undeveloped lot, other than a lot that was subject to the Section 4.137, where:
                    a.      Thereareatleastfoursinglefamilydetachedorattachedhomeswithin250feetof
                          the lot within the same subdivision or a phase of the subdivision; and
                    b.      A majority of the homes identified in subsection 4.a., above, have an average of
                          less than 20 square feet of south-facing glazing.

      E.    Publicinvolvement. The proposed structure is a publicly owned improvement.

(.07)  AdjustmentstotheMaximumShadePointHeightStandard.TheDevelopmentReviewBoardshall
      increasethemaximumpermittedheightof theshadepointdeterminedusingsection4.137.2(.05)to
      theextentitfindstheapplicanthasshownoneormoreof thefollowingconditionsexist,basedon
      plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, suncharts or
      photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

      A.     Physical conditions. Physical conditions preclude development of the site in a manner that
             complieswithsection4.137.2(.05),duetosuchthingsasalotsizelessthan3,000squarefeet,
             unstable or wet soils, or a drainage way, public or private easement, or right-of-way.

      B.      ConflictbetweentheMaximumShadePointHeightandAllowedShadeontheSolarFeature
             Standards. A proposed structure may be sited to meet the solar balance point standard
             describedinSection4.137.2(.09)orbesitedasneartothesolarbalancepointasallowedby
             Section 4.137.2(.09), if:

             1.      Whentheproposedstructureissitedtomeetthemaximumshadepointheightstandard
                    determined using Section 4.137.2(.05), its solar feature will potentially be shaded as
                    determined using Section 4.137.2(.08); and

                                                      CD4:253
§ 4.137.2                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      The application includes a form provided for that purpose by the City that:

                    a.      ReleasestheapplicantfromcomplyingwithSection4.137.2(.05)andagreesthat
                           the  proposed  structure  may  shade  an  area  otherwise  protected  by  section
                           4.137.2(.05).

                    b.      Releases the City from liability for damages resulting from the adjustment; and

                    c.      Issignedbytheowner(s)of thepropertiesthatwouldbeshadedbytheproposed
                           structure more than allowed by the provisions of Section 4.137.2(.05).

             3.      Before the City issues a permit for a proposed structure for which an adjustment has
                    been granted pursuant to Section 4.137.2(.07)(B), the applicant shall file the form
                    provided for in subsection 4.137.2(.07)(B)(2) above in the office of the County Re-
                    corder with the deeds to the affected properties.

(.08)  Analysisof AllowedShadeonSolarFeature:

      A.     An applicant may, but is not required to, perform the calculations in or comply with the
             standards of Section 4.137.2(.08).

      B.      Applicants are encouraged to design and site a proposed habitable structure so that the
             lowest point of any solar feature(s) will not be shaded by building or trees on lot(s) to the
             south.Theapplicantwillneedtocompletethefollowingcalculationproceduretodetermine
             if solar feature(s) of the proposed structure will be shaded. To start, the applicant should
             choosewhichof thefollowingsourcesof shadeoriginatingfromadjacentlot(s)tothesouth
             to use to calculate the maximum shade height at the north property line:

             1.      Existing structure(s) or trees; or

             2.      Themaximumshadethatcanbecastfromfuturebuildingsortrees,basedonTable4.
                    If the lot(s) to the south can be further divided, then the north-south dimension is
                    assumed to be the minimum lot width required for a new lot in that zone.

      C.     The height of the lowest point of any solar feature of the proposed structure is calculated
             withrespecttoeithertheaverageelevationortheelevationatthemidpointof thefrontlotline
             of the lot to the south.

                                                        CD4:254
                             PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                              § 4.137.2

D.     Theapplicantcandeterminetheheightof theshadowthatmaybecastupontheapplicant's
       solarfeaturebythesourceof shadeselectedinsubsectionBbyusingthefollowingformula
       or Table 3.
               SFSH = SH - (SGL/2.5)
               Where:
               SFSH = the allowed shadow height on the solar feature (see Figure 9: Solar Balance
               Point Standard).
               SH=theheightof theshadeatthenorthernlotlineof lot(s)tothesouthasdetermined
               in Section 4.137.2(.08)(B)
               SGL=thesolargainline(thedistancefromthesolarfeaturetothenorthernlotlineof
               adjacent lot(s) to the south (see Figure 8: Solar Gain Line).

                          Table 3: Maximum Permitted Height Of Shadow At Solar Feature (Feet)
                    Distance from         AllowedShadeHeightatNorthernLotlineof AdjacentLot(s)to
                    Solar       Gain                                      the South (In feet)
                    Line to lot line       22      21      20      19      18      17      16      15      14      13      12
                    (feet)
                            50               2        1
                            45               4        3        2        1
                            40               6        5        4        3        2        1
                            35               8        7        6        5        4        3        2        1
                            30              10       9        8        7        6        5        4        3        2        1
                            25              12      11      10       9        8        7        6        5        4        3        2
                            20              14      13      12      11      10       9        8        7        6        5        4
                            15              16      15      14      13      12      11      10       9        8        7        6
                            10              18      17      16      15      14      13      12      11      10       9        8
                             5               20      19      18      17      16      15      14      13      12      11      10
                       Table 4 may be used to determine (SH) in the above formula.

                                             TABLE 4: Table to Determine Shade Height
                    North-             100   95    90    85    80    75    70    65    60    55    50    45    40
                    south lot di-
                    mension   of
                    adjacent
                    lot(s) to the
                    south
                    Allowed             12    12    12    13    14    15    16    17    18    19    20    21    22
                    shade height
                    at the north
                    propertyline
                    of  adjacent
                    lot(s)        to
                    south

                                                       CD4:255
§ 4.137.2                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

      E.     If theallowedshadeheightonthesolarfeaturecalculatedinSubsectionDishigherthanthe
             lowestpointof thesolarfeaturecalculatedinSubsectionC,theapplicantshallbeencouraged
             toconsiderchangestothehousedesignorlocationwhichwouldmakeitpracticaltolocate
             the solar feature so that it will not be shaded in the future.

(.09)  SolarBalancePoint.If astructuredoesnotcomplywithmaximumshadepointheightstandardin
      Section4.137.2(.05)andtheallowedshadeonasolarfeaturestandardinSection4.137.2(.08),then
      thesolarbalancepointof thelotshallbecalculated(seeFigure9:SolarBalancePointStandard).
      Thesolarbalancelocationonthelotiswhereastructurewouldbeanequaldistancebetweenthe
      locationsrequiredbythemaximumshadepointheightstandardandtheallowedshadeonasolar
      feature standard.

(.10)  YardSetbackAdjustment. The City shall grant an adjustment to the side, front and/or rear yard
      setbackrequirement(s)byupto50percentif necessarytobuildaproposedstructuresoitcomplies
      with either the shade point height standard in Section 4.137.2(.05), the allowed shade on a solar
      featurestandardinSection4.137.2(.08),orthesolarbalancepointstandardinsection4.137.2(.09)
      asprovidedherein(seeFigure9:SolarBalancePointStandard).Thisadjustmentisnotintendedto
      encourage reductions in available solar access or unnecessary modification of setback require-
      ments,andshallapplyonlyif necessaryforastructuretocomplywiththeapplicableprovisionsof
      this chapter. [The following list illustrates yard adjustments permitted under this Section:]

      A.    PDR-7-SZone(s):
             1.      A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 12.5 feet.
             2.      A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 7.5 to 12.5 feet, depending on
                    building height.
             3.      A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 2.5 to 5.5 feet, depending on
                    building height.

      B.    PDR-4-SZone(s):
             1.      A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 7.5 feet.
             2.      A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 7.5 feet.
             3.      A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 2.5 or 3.5 feet, depending on
                    building height.

      C.    PDR-1-SZone(s):
             1.      A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
             2.      A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.
             3.      A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than 5 feet.

(.11)  Reviewprocess.ThegeneralapplicationprocedureslistedinSections4.008through4.024applyto
      this section.

      Note: Worksheets to calculate the solar balance point standards are available from the City
      Planning Department.

                                                      CD4:256
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.137.3

Section  4.137.3. Solar Access Permit Standards.

(.01)  Purpose. The purpose of  these standards is to protect solar access to solar features on lots
      designated or used for a single-family detached dwelling under some circumstances. It authorizes
      ownersof suchlotstoapplyforapermitthat,if granted,prohibitssolarfeaturesfrombeingshaded
      by certain future vegetation on and off the permittee's site.

(.02)  Applicability. An owner or contract purchaser of property may apply for and/or be subject to a
      solar access permit for a solar feature if that property is in any residential zone that is or will be
      developedwithasingle-familydwelling.TheCity'sdecisionwhetherornottograntasolaraccess
      permit is intended to be ministerial.

(.03)  Approvalstandardsforasolaraccesspermit. The Planning Director shall approve an application
      for a solar access permit if the record shows:
      A.     The application is complete;
      B.      The information it contains is accurate;
      C.     Vegetation on the applicant's property does not shade the solar feature;
      D.     No objection has been raised by an affected property owner;
      E.     Thatthepermit,if issued,doesnotconflictwithothersectionsof theWilsonvilleCode;and

      F.      Thatthepermit,if issued,wouldnotrestrictanylotwhichhasanaverageslopeof 15percent
             in the northerly direction.

(.04)  Dutiescreatedbysolaraccesspermit.
      A.     A party to whom the City grants a solar access permit shall:
             1.      Recordthepermit,legaldescriptionsof thepropertiesaffectedbythepermit,thesolar
                    access height limit, and the site plan required in Section 4.137.3(.05)(C) with such
                    modificationsasrequiredbytheresponsibleofficialintheofficeof thecountyrecorder
                    with the deeds to the properties affected by it, indexed by the names of the owners of
                    the affected properties, and pay the fees for such filing;
             2.      Install the solar feature in a timely manner as provided in Section 4.137.3(.08); and
             3.      Maintain vegetation on the site so it does not shade the solar feature.
      B.      Anownerof propertyburdenedbyasolaraccesspermitshallberesponsibleandpayallcosts
             for keeping vegetation from exceeding the solar access height limit. However, vegetation
             identifiedasexemptonthesiteplanrequiredinSection4.137.3(.05)(C),vegetationanowner
             showswasinthegroundonthedateanapplicationforasolaraccesspermitisfiled,andsolar
             friendly vegetation are exempt from the solar access permit.

(.05)  Applicationcontents. In addition to the application requirements pursuant to Section 4.035(.05),
      an application for a solar access permit shall contain the following information:
      A.     A legal description of the applicant's lot and legal description, owners' names, and owners'
             addresses for lots all or a portion of which are within 250 feet of the applicant's lot and 54
             degrees east and west of  true south measured from the east and west corners of  the

                                                        CD4:257
§ 4.137.3                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

             applicant'ssouthlotline.Theservicesof atitlecompanyshallbeusedtodeterminewhoowns
             property for purposes of an application. The failure of a property owner to receive notice
             shallnotinvalidatetheactionif agoodfaithattemptwasmadetonotifyallpersonswhomay
             be affected.

      B.      A scaled plan of the applicant's property showing:

             1.      Vegetation in the ground [as] of the date of the application, if when mature, that
                    vegetation could shade the solar feature.
             2.      Theapproximateheightabovethegradeof thesoar[solar]feature,itslocation,andits
                    orientation relative to true south.

      C.     A scaled plan of the properties on the list required in subsection A, above, showing:

             1.      Their approximate dimensions; and

             2.      Theapproximatelocationof allexistingvegetationoneachpropertythatcouldshade
                    the solar feature(s) on the applicant's property.

      D.     Foreachaffectedlot,therequestedsolaraccessheightlimit.Thesolaraccessheightlimitis
             a series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted height for vegetation on lots
             affected by a Solar Access Permit (see Figure 12: Solar Access Height Limit). The contour
             linesbeginatthebottomedgeof asolarfeatureforwhichapermitisrequestedandriseinfive
             foot increments at an angle to the south not less than 21.3 degrees from the horizon and
             extend not more [than] 54 degrees east and west of  true south. Notwithstanding the
             preceding,thesolaraccessheightlimitatthenorthernlotlineof anylotburdenedbyasolar
             access permit shall allow vegetation on that lot whose height causes not more shade on the
             benefitedpropertythancouldbecausedbyastructurethatcomplieswithSection4.137.2for
             existing lots.

      E.     A fee, as required for Class II Administrative Review.

      F.      If available, a statement signed by the owner(s) of some or all of the property(ies) to which
             the permit will apply if granted verifying that the vegetation shown on the plan submitted
             pursuanttoSection4.137.3(.05)(C)aboveaccuratelyrepresentsvegetationinthegroundon
             thedateof theapplication.Thesignedstatementsprovidedforhereinarepermittedbutnot
             required for a complete application.

(.06)  Applicationreviewprocess. Application for a solar access permit shall be reviewed under Section
      4.035 Class II - Administrative Review.

      A.     A Pre-Application Conference may be held in accordance with Section 4.010(.02).

      B.      After the pre-application meeting is held or waived, the applicant may file an application
             containing the information required in Section 4.137.3(.05) above.

      C.     AfterfilingtheapplicationinaccordancewithSection4.011(.01)thePlanningDirectororhis
             or her designate shall determine whether the application is complete in accordance with
             Section 4.011(.02).

                                                        CD4:258
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.137.3

D.     Within ten calendar days of receiving a complete application, the Planning Director shall
      mail notice of the proposed application, pursuant to Section 4.035(.03)A. The notice shall
      invite persons to submit information within ten calendar day, relevant to the standards
      pertinent to the proposal and giving reasons why the application should or should not be
      approvedorproposingconditionsthepersonbelievesarenecessaryforapprovalaccordingto
      the standards.

      1.      The notice shall include the plot plans required in Sections 4.137.3(.05)(B) and (C)
             above, the proposed solar access height limits, and duties created by the permit.

      2.      The notice shall request recipients to verify that the plot plan shows all vegetation on
             therecipient'sproperty,andtosendthePlanningDirectorcommentsinwritingwithin
             10 calendar days after the notice is mailed if the recipient believes the applicant's plot
             plan is inaccurate.

E.     Within ten calendar days of the final response date, the Planning Director shall consider
      responsesreceivedfromaffectedpartiesand/oraninspectionof thesite,modifytheplotplan
      and the permit to be consistent with the accurate information, and make a final decision
      pursuant to Section 4.035(.03)(C.)

      1.      If thefinaldecisionistodenythepermit,thePlanningDirectorshallmailacopyof the
             decision to the applicant.

      2.      If thefinaldecisionistoapprovethepermit,andtheownersof allaffectedproperties
             didverifytheaccuracyof theplotplanaspermittedunderSection4.137.3(.05)(F),the
             Planning Director shall mail a copy of  the decision to the applicant and affected
             parties. The notice to affected parties shall include information that the solar access
             permitexistsandthatitmayaffecttheabilityof thepropertyownertogrowvegetation,
             and that it imposes certain obligations the property owner to trim vegetation.

      3.      If thefinaldecisionistoapprovethepermit,andtheownersof allaffectedproperties
             didnotverifytheaccuracyof theplotplanaspermittedunderSection4.137.3(.05)(F),
             thePlanningDirectorshallsendacopyof thefinaldecisiontotheapplicantandtothe
             owners of  affected properties (including those who did not sign the verification
             statement pursuant to Section 4.137.3(.05)(F)). The notice to affected parties shall
             includeinformationthatthesolaraccesspermitexistsandthatitmayaffecttheability
             of the property owner to grow vegetation, and that it imposes certain obligations the
             property owner to trim vegetation.

F.      If the application is approved, the permit is not effective until the applicant records the
      permit, associated solar access height limits, legal descriptions for the affected properties
      (including the property where the solar feature is to be located), any special exceptions or
      exemptions from the usual affects of a solar access permit, and the site plan required in
      section4.137.3(.05)(C)(withsuchmodificationsasrequiredbytheresponsibleofficialinthe
      office of the county recorder) with the deeds to the properties affected by the permit.

                                                 CD4:259
§ 4.137.3                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

(.07)  Permitenforcementprocess:

      A.    Enforcementrequest.AsolaraccesspermitteemayrequesttheCitytoenforcethesolaraccess
             permit by providing the following information to the Planning Director:

             1.      A copy of the solar access permit and the plot plans submitted with the permit; and

             2.      Thelegaldescriptionof thelot(s)onwhichallegedvegetationissituated,theaddressof
                   theowner(s)of thatproperty,andascaledsiteplanof thelot(s)showingthevegetation;
                   and

             3.      Evidencethevegetationviolatesthesolaraccesspermit,suchassunchartphotograph,
                   shadow pattern, and/or photographs.

      B.    Enforcement process. If the Planning Director determines the request for enforcement is
             complete, he or she shall initiate an enforcement action pursuant to WC section 4.025 and
             4.026. Provided the Planning Director shall not enforce the permit against vegetation the
             ownerof whichshowswasinthegroundonthedatethepermitapplicationwasfiledwiththe
             City.

(.08)  Expirationandextensionof asolaraccesspermit:

      A.    Expiration.EverypermitissuedbythePlanningDirectorundertheprovisionsof thissection
             shall expire if the construction of the solar feature protected by such permit is not com-
             mencedwithin180daysfromthedateof suchpermit;if theconstructionof thesolarfeature
             protectedbysuchpermitissuspendedorabandonedatanytimeaftertheworkiscommenced
             foraperiodof 180days;ortheuseof thesolarfeatureisdiscontinuedformorethantwelve
             consecutivemonths.Theapplicantmayreapplyforasolaraccesspermitinaccordancewith
             Section 4.137.3. The fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such
             work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
             specificationsforsuchwork;andprovidedfurtherthatsuchsuspensionorabandonmenthas
             notexceededoneyear.If thepermitteedoesnotshowconstructionof thesolarfeaturewill
             bestartedwithin180daysof thedateof thepermitortheextension,orif thesolarfeatureis
             removed, the Planning Director shall terminate the permit by recording a notice of expira-
             tion in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the affected properties.

      B.    Extensions. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the
             timewithinwhichheorshemaycommenceworkunderthatpermitwhenheorsheisunable
             tocommenceworkwithinthetimerequiredbythissectionforgoodandsatisfactoryreasons.
             The Planning Director may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not
             exceeding180daysuponwrittenrequestbythepermitteeshowingthatcircumstancesbeyond
             the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be
             extended more than once.

                                                     CD4:260
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                            § 4.137.3

                CD4:261
§ 4.137.3                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                 CD4:262
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                            § 4.137.3

                CD4:263
§ 4.137.3                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                 CD4:264
PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                            § 4.137.3

                CD4:265
§ 4.137.3                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.137.5. Screening and Buffering (SB) Overlay Zone.

(.01)  Purpose. The Screening and Buffering Overlay Zone is intended to be used with any underlying
      basezonetospecifyappropriatescreeningandbufferingstandardsforareaswhereresidentialand
      nonresidentialusesabut.The"SB"OverlayZoneisusedtoassurethatthereisadequateseparation
      and screening between potentially conflicting land uses. The buffering is achieved by restricting
      access,increasingsetbacks,requiringadditionallandscaping,restrictingsigns,and,insomecases,
      by requiring additional information and proof of mitigation for uses that may otherwise cause
      off-site impacts or nuisances.

                                                        CD4:266
                              PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.137.5

(.02)  Wherethe"SB"OverlayZoneistobeApplied.TheScreeningandBufferingOverlayZoneistobe
      applied primarily along the edge of nonresidential zones abutting, or located directly across the
      street from, residential zones. As with any zoning, the "SB" Overlay Zone is only applied where
      established by action of the City Council.

(.03)  Landscaped Areas. The following landscape requirements apply to the "SB" Overlay Zone.
      Structures,exteriorstorageandexteriordisplayof merchandiseareprohibitedintheselandscaped
      areas.

      A.    CommercialProperties.ForlandzonedPDC,aten(10)footdeeparealandscapedtoatleast
            theL-3standard,specifiedinSection4.176,mustbeprovidedalongallstreetfrontagesacross
            from properties zoned or designated in the Comprehensive Plan for residential use. (See
            Figure23:HighScreenLandscaping.)Atenfootdeeplandscapedareashallalsobeprovided
            atanypointwherethepropertyadjoinsapropertythatisplannedorzonedforresidentialuse.

      B.    IndustrialProperties.ForlandzonedPDI,a20footdeeparealandscapedtoatleasttheL-3
            standard,oraten)footdeeparealandscapedtoatleasttheL-4standard,shallbeprovided
            alongallpropertylineswherethe"SB"OverlayZoneisapplied.(SeeFigures23:HighScreen
            Landscaping and Figure 24: High Wall Landscaping.)

(.04)  IngressandEgress.Motorvehicleaccessshallbelimitedthroughanylandscapedarearequiredin
      the "SB" Overlay Zone. The Development Review Board may impose additional landscape
      requirements to minimize the visual impacts of any vehicle access points that are approved.

(.05)  Exterior Work. No exterior manufacturing, storage, sales, or other similar work shall be per-
      formed within the "SB" Overlay Zone.

(.06)  Signs.Nosigns,otherthanapprovedmonumentsigns,shallbepermittedwithinthe"SB"Overlay
      Zone.

(.07)  Performance Standards and Off-Site Impacts. Many of Wilsonville's base zones contain perfor-
      mancestandardstolimitimpactsonsurroundingpropertiesandtheoverallcommunity.Develop-
      ersshallbeencouragedtoutilizethestandardsof the"SB"OverlayZonetohelpassurecompliance
      with the performance standards.

                                                    CD4:267
§ 4.137.5                                                  WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                 CD4:268
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.138

Section  4.138. Old Town (O) Overlay Zone.

(.01)  Purpose.Thepurposeof thisoverlayzoneistoestablishthedesignstandardsthatwillbeapplied
      todevelopmentswithintheOldTownneighborhood,mappedastheBoonesFerryDistrictinthe
      City's West Side Master Plan. The following purpose statement is not intended as a set of
      additionalpermitcriteria.Rather,itisadescriptionof thedesiredoutcomeasdevelopmentoccurs
      incrementally, over time. This overlay district is intended to create a modern interpretation of a
      traditionaloldtownMainStreetandmixeduseneighborhood.ItisrecognizedthattheOldTown
      neighborhoodisof uniquesignificancebecauseof itsexistingpatternof mixeduses,itsaccessto
      the Willamette River and because it was the original center of housing and commerce for the
      community.
      A.     The standards of the "O" overlay zone are intended to assure that, through the appropriate
             use of architectural details, windows, building orientation, facades, and construction mate-
             rials, new structures, and major alterations of  existing structures, create a pleasing and
             pedestrian-friendly environment.
      B.      It is the desire of  the City to have commercial, industrial, multi-family, and mixed use
             buildings in the "O" overlay zone reflect a range of architectural types and styles that were
             popular in the Willamette Valley from approximately 1880 to 1930 and for single-family
             homes and middle housing to be consistent with and enhance the historic small town
             residential character of the neighborhood. The following design standards are intended to
             further define those characteristics that will convey the desired architecture.
      C.     These standards are intended to encourage quality design, to enhance public safety, and to
             provideacomfortableandattractivestreetenvironmentbyprovidingfeaturesandamenities
             of valuetopedestrians.Qualitydesignwillresultinanarrangementof buildingsthatarein
             visual harmony with one-another, leading to a neighborhood that is vital, interesting,
             attractive, and safe. These qualities contribute to the health and vitality of  the overall
             community.
      D.     These standards shall be used by the City's Planning Division and Development Review
             Board in reviewing development applications within the Old Town neighborhood.
(.02)  The "O" Overlay zone shall be applied in conjunction with the underlying base zones in the Old
      Town neighborhood.

(.03)  ReviewProcessinthe"O"Overlayzone:
      A.     ThefollowingshallbereviewedusingtheSiteDesignReviewprocessforconformancewith
             the standards in Subsection (.05) as well the Site Design Review standards (Sections 4.421)
             and other applicable standards:
             1.      New commercial, industrial, public facility, multi-family residential, and mixed use
                    building construction and the substantial redevelopment of existing buildings, ; and
             2.      Exteriorremodelingof commercial,industrial,publicfacility,multi-familyresidential,
                    or mixed use building that requires a building permit, when that remodeling is visible
                    from a public street (other than an alley) and changes the existing design of  the
                    building; and

                                                       CD4:269
§ 4.138                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Upontherequestof anapplicant,inordertopursueadesignnotinconformancewith
                    the Old Town Residential Design Standards Book, new single-family homes, middle
                    housing, and accessory buildings, or remodeling thereof. Standards for ADU's in
                    Subsection (.04)C. below shall apply.
      B.      The following (except as noted in A.3. above) shall be reviewed through the Class I admin-
             istrative review process for conformance with the Development Standards of Subsection
             (.04) concurrently with building plan review:
             1.      New single-family homes and middle housing, single-family home or middle housing
                    additions,remodels,accessorydwellingunits,garages,andotherbuildingsaccessoryto
                    a single-family or middle housing use.

(.04)  Single-FamilyandMiddleHousingDevelopmentStandards(includingaccessorybuildings):

      A.     Thestandardsof thissubsectionshalltakeprecedenceoversetback,lotcoverage,height,and
             accessorydwellingunitstandardsotherwiseestablishedintheDevelopmentCodeexceptthat
             ten foot front and rear setbacks for cottage clusters and zero setbacks for attached town-
             housesshallcontinuetoapply.Allotherstandardsof thebasezoneand/orapprovedplanned
             developments shall apply.
      B.      Developmentshallcomply(exceptasnotedin1.and2.below)withthestandardsof theOld
             TownResidentialDesignStandardsBookincludingbutnotlimitedtoarchitecturaldesign,
             height, setbacks, and lot coverage.
             1.      Anapplicantforaremodelof and/oradditiontostructuresexistingpriortoDecember
                    1,2017,includingthecreationof middlehousingthroughconversionof oradditionto
                    anexistingsingle-familyhome,mayelecttomatchtheexistingdesignof thestructure
                    ratherthancomplywiththeOldTownResidentialDesignStandardsBookif allof the
                    following are met:
                    a.      Theheightof thestructureremainsthesameandanyadditionsdonotexceedthe
                          height of the existing structure;
                    b.      The roof pitch on the existing portion of the structure remains the same and is
                          matched for additions involving facades facing a street or public open space;
                    c.      Allexteriormaterialsaresubstantiallysimilarinstyleandtexturetotheexisting
                          materials on the structure;
                    d.      Forfacadesof thestructurefacingastreetorpublicopenspace(doesnotinclude
                          alleys) all architectural elements, such as windows, doors, porches, dormers,
                          details, etc. are kept the same, or in the case of extending out a wall during an
                          addition, reproduced; and
                    e.      Setbacks and lot coverage requirements of the underlying zone are met.

      2.      Accessorystructureslessthan120squarefeetandtenfeetinheightarenotsubjecttotheOld
             Town Residential Design Standards but rather the standards of the underlying zone.

      C.     The following standards shall apply to Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU's) within the "O"
             Overlay Zone to ensure smaller bulk of residential buildings and minimal use of on-street

                                                      CD4:270
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.138

             parking consistent with the historic character of the neighborhood. Where these standards
             differfromthoseof Subsection4.113(.10),includingsizedesignandparking,thesestandards
             take precedence. All other standards of Subsection 4.113(.10), including but not limited to
             number of ADU's and review process, continue to apply.

             1.      Size: ADU's shall not exceed 600 square feet of living space.

             2.      Design: ADU's shall be substantially the same exterior design and architecture (i.e.
                    siding,windows,color,roof pitch,doorsandroofingmaterials)astheprimarydwelling
                    unit on the property. ADU's shall be either:
                    a.      Detached single-story structures; or
                    b.      Over a detached garage meeting the following requirements:
                           i.       Thegarage/ADUstructureisamaximumoneandone-half storiestall,not
                                 exceeding a height of 20 feet; and
                           ii.      The primary dwelling unit on the property is one and one-half or two
                                 stories tall.

(.05)  StandardsforDevelopmentSubjecttoSiteDesignReview:

      A.    Building Setbacks. Buildings fronting Boones Ferry Road shall abut the public sidewalk
             except where public plazas, courtyards, approved landscaping, or other public pedestrian
             amenities are approved. Except, however, that residential garages or carports shall be set
             back a minimum of 20 feet from any sidewalk or traveled portion of a street across which
             accesstothegarageorcarportistaken.TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmayapproveother
             setbacks to accommodate sidewalks, landscaping, or other streetscape features located
             between the street right-of-way and the building.

      B.    Landscaping. Not less than 15 percent of the development site shall be landscaped. In the
             event that a building is set back from a street side property line, along Boones Ferry Road,
             BaileyStreet,or5thStreet,theinterveningareashallbelandscaped.Inreviewingproposals
             for parking lots in locations between buildings and streets, the Development Review Board
             may require special landscaping treatments or designs to screen the view of the parking lot
             from the public right-of-way.

      C.    Buildingheight. As specified in the underlying base zone.

      D.    StreetaccesstoBoonesFerryRoad.IngressandegresspointsalongBoonesFerryRoadshall
             be designed and constructed such that access points on one side of  the road shall be
             consistent with the Public Works Standards. New developments along Boones Ferry Road
             andnorthof BaileyStreetwillhaveaccesspointsdesignedandconstructedinapatternthat
             replicates the shape of Main Street blocks.

      E.    Pedestrianenvironment. In order to enhance the pedestrian scale of the neighborhood:

             1.      Specialattentionshallbegiventotheprimarybuildingentrances,assuringthattheyare
                    both attractive and functional.

                                                       CD4:271
§ 4.138                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      The pedestrian environment shall be enhanced by amenities such as street furniture,
                    landscaping,awnings,andmovableplanterswithflowers,asrequiredbytheDevelop-
                    ment Review Board.

             3.      Sidewalkwidthmayvaryfromblocktoblock,dependinguponthenatureof adjacent
                    landusesandthesetbacksof existingbuildings.Provided,however,thatacontinuityof
                    streetscape design is maintained along Boones Ferry Road, generally following the
                    patternthathasbeenstartedwiththe1996approvalforOldTownVillageonthewest
                    side of Boones Ferry Road from Fourth Street to Fifth Street.
                    a.      North of  Bailey Street, where the most intense commercial development is
                          anticipated, the widest sidewalks and most mature landscaping are required.
                    b.      Insituationswhereexistingbuildingsarelocatedattheright-of-wayline,special
                          sidewalk designs may be necessary to assure pedestrian access.

      F.      Whenpracticable,buildingsalongBoonesFerryRoadshalloccupy100percentof thestreet
             frontagebetweenblocksegments.Upto25percentof streetfrontagemaybeinpublicplazas,
             courtyards,andsimilarlandscapeorstreetscapefeaturesthatprovidepublicspacesadjacent
             tothesidewalk.Forsmallerlots,whichmaynothavefunctionalalternativesforparking,up
             to 40 percent of lot frontage may be used for parking, provided that appropriate screening
             and visual enhancement is created between the parking area and the sidewalk. Appropriate
             pedestrian connections shall be constructed between such parking lots and sidewalks.

      G.    Buildingcompatibility:

             1.      Thedesignandmaterialsof proposedbuildingsshallreflectthearchitecturalstylesof
                    the Willamette Valley during the period from 1880 to 1930.

             2.      Commercial and manufacturing buildings shall be designed to reflect the types of
                    masonryorwoodstorefrontbuildingsthatweretypicalintheperiodfrom1880to1930.
                    Larger modern buildings shall be designed with facades that are divided to give the
                    appearance of a series of smaller buildings or distinctive store fronts, and/or multi-
                    storied structures with, at least, the appearance of second stories.

             3.      Residential buildings shall be designed to reflect the size and shape of traditional
                    dwellings from the period from 1880 to 1930. Where larger multi-family residential
                    buildings are proposed, their building facades shall be divided into units that give the
                    appearance of a series of smaller dwellings.

             4.      Manufacturedhousingunitsandmobilehomes,if locatedoutsideof approvedmanu-
                    facturedormobilehomeparks,shallmeetthedesignstandardsappliedtoothersingle
                    family dwellings in the area.

      H.    Buildingmaterials:

             1.      Facadesshallbevariedandarticulatedtoprovidevisualinteresttopedestrians.Within
                    larger developments, variations in facades, floor levels, architectural features, and/or
                    exteriorfinishesshallbeusedtocreatetheappearanceof aseriesof smallerbuildings.

                                                       CD4:272
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.138

      2.      Exterior building materials shall be durable, and shall convey a visual impression of
             durability. Materials such as masonry, stone, stucco, and wood will generally provide
             such an appearance. Other materials that replicate the appearance of those durable
             materials may also be used.
      3.      Wheremasonryistobeusedforexteriorfinish,variedpatternsaretobeincorporated
             to break up the appearance of larger surfaces.
      4.      Woodsidingistobebevel,shinglesidingorchannelsidingortheequivalent.T-111and
             similarsheathedsidingshallnotbeusedunlessitisincorporatedwithbattentreatment
             to give the appearance of boards.
      5.      Exterior materials and colors are to match the architecture of the period.

I.     Roof materials,roof designandparapets:
      1.      Pitched roof structures shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12.

      2.      Roofs with a pitch of less than 4:12 are permitted, provided that they have detailed,
             stepped parapets or detailed masonry coursing.
      3.      Parapetcornersaretobestepped.Parapetsaretobedesignedtoemphasizethecenter
             entrance or primary entrance(s).
      4.      Sloped roofs that will be visible from the adjoining street right-of-way shall be of a
             dark, non-ornamental color.
      5.      Preferred roofing materials that are visible from a public street include wood or
             architectural grade composition shingle, tile, or metal with standing or batten seams.
             Metal roofs without raised seams shall not be used in visible locations.

      6.      Allroof andwall-mountedmechanical,electrical,communications,andserviceequip-
             ment,includingsatellitedishes,wirelesscommunicationequipment,andventpipesare
             tobecompletelyscreenedfrompublicviewbyparapets,wallsorotherapprovedmeans;
             or,alternatively,maybeeffectivelycamouflagedtomatchtheexteriorof thebuilding.
             a.      "Public view" is intended to mean the view from the sidewalk directly across the
                    street from the site.
             b.      Roof  and wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service
                    equipment, including satellite dishes, wireless communication equipment, and
                    vent pipes that are visible from Interstate-5 shall be effectively camouflaged to
                    match the exterior of the building.

J.     Buildingentrances. If visible from the street, entrances to commercial, industrial, or multi-
      familyresidentialbuildingsaretobearchitecturallyemphasized,withcoveringsasnotedin
      subsection (.09), below.

      1.      The Development Review Board may establish conditions concerning any or all
             building entrances, especially where such entrances are adjacent to parking lots. For
             buildings fronting on Boones Ferry Road, at least one entrance shall be from the
             sidewalk.

                                                 CD4:273
§ 4.138                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      Secondary building entrances may have lesser architectural standards than primary
                    entrances.

      K.    Buildingfacades:

             1.      Ornamental devices, such as moldings, entablature, and friezes, are encouraged at
                    buildingroof lines.Wheresuchornamentationistobeintheformof alinearmolding
                    or board, it shall match or complement the architecture of the building.

             2.      Buildings are to incorporate amenities such as alcoves, awnings, roof  overhangs,
                    porches, porticoes, and/or arcades to protect pedestrians from the rain and sun.
                    Awningsandentrancesmaybedesignedtobesharedbetweentwoadjoiningstructures.
                    (See subsection (.08), above.)

             3.      Commercial and manufacturing buildings with frontage on Boones Ferry Road shall
                    incorporate the following traditional storefront elements:

                    a.      Building fronts to be located at the right-of-way line for streets, except in cases
                           whereanapprovedsidewalkorotherstreetscapefeaturesarelocatedbetweenthe
                           street right-of-way and the building. Intervening areas are to be attractively
                           landscaped.
                    b.      Upper and lower facades are to be clearly delineated.

                    c.      Lower facades shall include large windows, as specified in subsection "(L.),"
                           below, and recessed entries.
                    d.      Tops of facades shall have decorative cornices.

             4.      Buildings are to have variations in relief, including such things as cornices, bases,
                    fenestration, fluted masonry, and other aesthetic treatments to enhance pedestrian
                    interest.

      L.    WindowsinbuildingsadjacenttoBoonesFerryRoad:

             1.      Windows shall include amenities such as bottom sills, pediments, or awnings. Glass
                    curtainwalls,highlyreflectiveglass,andpaintedordarklytintedglassarenotpermit-
                    ted other than stained or leaded glass.

             2.      Ground-floorwindowsoncommercialorindustrialbuildingsshallincludethefollow-
                    ing features:
                    a.      Windowsshallbedesignedtoallowviewsintointerioractivityareasanddisplay
                           areas along street frontages.

                    b.      Sills shall be no more than four feet above grade, unless a different design is
                           necessitated by unusual interior floor levels.

                    c.      At least 20 percent, of ground floor wall area along Boones Ferry Road, Bailey
                           Street, or 5th Street shall be in windows or entries. No blank walls shall be
                           permitted abutting any street other than an alley.

                                                        CD4:274
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.138

             3.      Upper-floor windows on commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential buildings
                    shall include the following features:
                    a.      Glass dimensions shall not exceed five feet wide by seven feet high.
                    b.      Windows shall be fully trimmed with molding that is at least two inches wide.
                    c.      Multiple-light windows or windows with grid patterns may be required by the
                           Development Review Board when architecturally consistent with the building.
      M.   Landscapesandstreetscapes:
             1.      Thestreetlightstobeusedintheareashallbeof astandardizeddesignthroughoutthe
                    Old Town Overlay District.
             2.      Benches, outdoor seating, and trash receptacles are to be designed to match the
                    architecture in the area.
             3.      Benches and other streetscape items placed within the public right-of-way must not
                    blockthefreemovementof pedestrians,includingpeoplewithdisabilities.Aminimum
                    pedestrian walkway of five feet shall be maintained at all times. Standards of the
                    Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be observed.

      N.    Lighting:
             1.      All building entrances and exits shall be well-lit. The minimum lighting level for
                    commercial, industrial, or multi-family residential building entrances is to be four
                    foot-candles.Themaximumstandardistobetenfoot-candles.Alightingplanshallbe
                    submitted for review by the Development Review Board.
             2.      Exteriorlightingistobeanintegralpartof thearchitecturaldesignandmustcomple-
                    mentthestreetlightingof thearea,unlessitislocatedatthesideorrearof buildingsin
                    locations that are not facing a public street that is not an alley.
             3.      Innocaseislightingtoproduceglareonneighboringpropertiesorpublicrights-of-way
                    such that a nuisance or safety hazard results.

      O.    Exteriorstorage:
             1.      Exteriorstorageof merchandiseormaterialsshallbesubjecttothefencingorscreening
                    standards of Section 4.176 of the Wilsonville Code. The Development Review Board
                    may prescribe special standards for landscaping or other screening of walls or fences.
             2.      Temporary outdoor displays of merchandise shall be permitted, subject to the condi-
                    tions of the development permit or temporary use permit for the purpose. Where
                    pedestrian access is provided, a minimum walkway width of five feet shall be main-
                    tained at all times.

      P.     Storage of Trash and Recyclables. Storage areas for trash and recyclables shall meet the
             applicable City requirements of Sections 4.179 and 4.430 of the Wilsonville Code.

      Q.    Signs.Signsshallmatchthearchitectureof buildingsinthearea,andshallbesubjecttothe
             provisions of Sections 4.156.01 through 4.156.11 of the Wilsonville Code.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 810, 11-20-2017)

                                                       CD4:275
§ 4.139.00                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.139.00. Significant Resource Overlay Zone (SROZ) Ordinance.

Definitions:

      1.     Areaof LimitedConflictingUses. An Area of Limited Conflicting Uses is either:
             a.      An area located between the riparian corridor boundary, riparian impact area or the
                    UrbanGrowthManagementFunctionalPlan(UGMFP)MetroTitle3WaterQuality
                    ResourceAreaboundary,whicheverisfurthestawayfromthewetlandorstream,and
                    the outside edge of the SROZ; or
             b.      An isolated significant wildlife habitat (upland forest) resource site.

      2.     BankfulStage.Thestageorelevationatwhichwateroverflowsthenaturalbanksof streams
             or other waters of the state and begins to inundate upland areas. In the absence of physical
             evidence, the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation may be used to approximate the
             bankful stage.

      3.     Emergency.Anyhuman-causedornaturaleventorcircumstancescausingorthreateningloss
             of life,injurytopersonorproperty,andincludes,butisnotlimitedtofire,explosion,flood,
             severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of hazardous mate-
             rial, contamination, utility or transportation disruptions, and disease.

      4.     Encroachment Area. An area within the Area of Limited Conflicting Uses where develop-
             ment may be permitted.

      5.     ImpactArea.Theareaadjacenttotheouterboundaryof aSignificantResourcewithinwhich
             development or other alteration activities may be permitted through the review of a Signif-
             icantResourceImpactReport(SRIR)orwhereanSRIRhasbeenwaivedinaccordancewith
             thisordinance.Theimpactareais25feetwideunlessotherwisespecifiedinthisordinanceor
             by the decision making body.

      6.     RiparianCorridor. Is a Goal 5 resource that includes the water areas, fish habitat, adjacent
             riparian areas, and wetlands within the riparian area boundary. The "riparian area" is the
             area adjacent to a river, lake, stream, consisting of lands that include the area of transition
             from aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem. The Riparian Corridor is diagrammati-
             cally defined in Section 4.139.00.

      7.     RiparianCorridorCrossSections.RipariancorridorsignificancefortheCityof Wilsonville
             is based on assessment of several factors:

             a.      The presence of habitat used by species listed as threatened or endangered by the
                    EndangeredSpeciesAct.Theresourceisconsideredsignificantif ESA-listedsalmonid
                    fish species utilize portions of the resource area.
             b.      The protection of ESA listed species habitat both on - or off-site. The resource is
                    considered significant if it provides functions that protect the habitat of ESA-listed
                    species,eitheron-oroff-site.Ripariancorridorscanprotectwaterqualityparameters
                    suchastemperature,suspendedsedimentandcontaminantsof downstreamwatersthat
                    are ESA-listed species habitat.

                                                       CD4:276
                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.139.00

c.      The inclusion of other significant Goal 5 resource areas. Riparian corridor resources
      that contain significant wetlands and/or wildlife habitat are considered significant.

d.      The provision of  habitat continuity for wildlife. Riparian corridor resources that
      providealinkorcontinuityforwildlifemovementbetweensignificantwildlifehabitat
      areas are considered significant.

e.      Headwaterareas,includingintermittentstreams,canbeimportantforfishandwildlife
      resources. These areas can provide good quality water, protection of water quality,
      insect and organic materials, and other factors for habitat areas downstream.

Generalized riparian corridor types are shown on the following pages.

                                          CD4:277
§ 4.139.00                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

            RiparianareaadjacenttothestreamislessthanoneAPTHwide,andhasanadjacentslope.
            Theadjacentslopeisdesignatedasriparianimpactarea,basedonthepotentialforactivities
            on the slope to have direct impacts on riparian area functions.

            Notesforallriparianfigures:(1)The"areaof limitedconflictinguse"and"SRImpactArea"
            areregulatoryareasdefinedintheproposedCityof WilsonvilleSignificantResourceOverlay
            Zone(4.139.00).TheSRImpactAreaisalways25feetwidefromtheedgeof thesignificant
            resource (SR).

            Riparianareaadjacenttothestreamislessthanthewidthof thestreamsideterraceorbench,
            andthebaseof theadjacentslopeisadistancegreaterthanoneAPTHfromthestreambank.
            If the riparian area is less wide than the distance of one APTH, then the remaining APTH
            distance is the riparian impact area.

                                                     CD4:278
                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                            § 4.139.00

Riparianareaadjacenttothestreamisupland,forestedwetland,oramosaicof uplandand
wetland,anddoesnothaveadjacentsteepslopeswithin200ft.If theriparianarea,including
wetlands adjacent to the stream, is less wide than one APTH, the riparian impact area
extends to a distance of one APTH from the top of the stream bank.

Riparian area is emergent or emergent/shrub wetland, and does not have adjacent steep
slopes within 200 ft. The wetland is the riparian corridor. The potential impacts of human
activitiesadjacenttothewetland/riparianareadonotwarrantplacingariparianimpactarea
on this corridor type.

                                       CD4:279
§ 4.139.00                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

             Riparian area is confined to a portion of the river bank where the adjacent land is not
             inundated annually (i.e. not an operational floodplain). The riparian impact area is a
             minimum 75 feet wide from the top of the stream bank.
             For any areas along the Willamette River that have an operational floodplain (i.e. flooded
             annually), the riparian area is the extent of the operational floodplain.
      8.     RiparianImpactArea.Anareawithinwhichhumanactivitiescouldhaveadverseimpactson
             functions of adjacent riparian corridor resources.
      9.     Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR). A report that delineates specific resource
             boundaries and analyzes the impacts of development on significant natural resources. It
             outlines measures to prevent negative impacts, and also provides mitigation and enhance-
             ment plans.

                                                        CD4:280
                                    PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.139.01

       10.   SignificantResourceOverlayZone(SROZ):Thedelineatedouterboundaryof asignificant
               natural resource that includes: a significant Goal 5 natural resource, lands protected under
               Metro's Urban Growth Management Functional Plan Title 3 (Water Quality Resource
               Areas), riparian corridors, and significant wildlife habitat.

       11.   Starting Point for Measurement: Is the edge of  the defined channel (bankful stage) for
               streams/rivers, delineated wetland boundary, delineated spring boundary, and/or average
               high water for lakes or ponds, whichever offers greatest resource protection. Intermittent
               springslocatedmorethan15feetfromstreams/riversorwetlandsshallnotserveasastarting
               point for measurement.

                      Table NR-1: Metro Water Quality Resource Area Slope Calculations

            ProtectedWater                 SlopeAdjacentto                StartingPointfor
            FeatureType                    ProtectedWater                 MeasurementsfromWa-
            (Seedefinitions)               Feature                        terFeature                     Widthof VegetatedCorridor(Setback)
            Primary Protected                                                                            50 feet
            Water Features1                <25%                                 -Edge of bankful stageor 2-year storm level;
                                                                          -Delineated edge of Ti-
                                                                          tle 3 wetland
            Primary Protected                                                                            200 feet
            Water Features1                ≥25% for 150 feet ormore5                                 -Edge of bankful stageor 2-year storm level;
                                                                          -Delineated edge of Ti-
                                                                          tle 3 wetland
            Primary Protected                                                                            Distance from starting
            Water Features1                ≥25% for less than 150feet5                                    Edge of bankful stageor 2-year storm level;point of measurement
                                                                          -Delineated edge of Ti-        to top of ravine (break
                                                                          tle 3 wetland                  in ≥25% slope)3, plus 50
                                                                                                         feet4
            Secondary Protected                                                                          15 feet
            Water Features2                <25%                                 Edge of bankful stageor 2-year storm level;
                                                                          -Delineated edge of Ti-
                                                                          tle 3 wetland
            Secondary Protected                                                                          50 feet
            Water Features2                ≥25%5                                 Edge of bankful stageor 2-year storm level;
                                                                          -Delineated edge of Ti-
                                                                          tle 3 wetland

               1  PrimaryProtectedWaterFeaturesinclude:allperennialstreamsandstreamsdraininggreaterthan100acres,Title
               3 wetlands, natural lakes andspring.

               2  Secondary Protected WaterFeatures includeintermittentstreams draining50—100 acres.

               3  WheretheprotectedWaterFeatureisconfinedbyaravineorgully,thetopof ravineisthebreakinthe>25percent
               slope
               4  Amaximumreductionof 25feetmaybepermittedinthewidthof vegetatedcorridorbeyondtheslopebreakif a
               geotechnicalreportdemonstratesthatslopeisstable.Toestablishthewidthof thevegetatedcorridor,slopeshould
               be measured in 25-foot increments away from the waterfeature untilslope is less than 25 percent(top of ravine).

               5  Vegetated corridors in excess of 50-feet from primary protected features, or in excess of 15-feet from secondary
               protected features, apply on steep slopes only in the uphilldirectionfrom the protected waterfeature.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.01. SROZ—Purpose.

TheSignificantResourceOverlayZone(SROZ)isintendedtobeusedwithanyunderlyingbasezoneas
shownontheCityof WilsonvilleZoningMap.Thepurposeof theSignificantResourceOverlayZoneis
toimplementthegoalsandpoliciesof theComprehensivePlanrelatingtonaturalresources,openspace,

                                                             CD4:281
§ 4.139.01                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

environment, flood hazard, and the Willamette River Greenway. In addition, the purposes of these
regulationsaretoachievecompliancewiththerequirementsof theMetroUrbanGrowthManagement
Functional Plan (UGMFP) relating to Title 3 Water Quality Resource Areas, and Title 13 Habitat
Conservation Areas, and that portion of Statewide Planning Goal 5 relating to significant natural
resources.Itisnottheintentof thisordinancetopreventdevelopmentwheretheimpactstosignificant
resources can be minimized or mitigated.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.02. Where these Regulations Apply.

The regulations of this Section apply to the portion of any lot or development site, which is within a
Significant Resource Overlay Zone and its associated "Impact Areas". The text provisions of  the
Significant Resource Overlay Zone ordinance take precedence over the Significant Resource Overlay
Zonemaps.TheSignificantResourceOverlayZoneisdescribedbyboundarylinesshownontheCityof
WilsonvilleSignificantResourceOverlayZoneMap.Forthepurposeof implementingtheprovisionsof
this Section, the Wilsonville Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map is used to determine whether a
SignificantResourceImpactReport(SRIR)isrequired.Throughthedevelopmentof anSRIR,amore
specific determination can be made of possible impacts on the significant resources.

Unless otherwise exempted by these regulations, any development proposed to be located within the
SignificantResourceOverlayZoneand/orImpactAreamustcomplywiththeseregulations.Wherethe
provisions of this Section conflict with other provisions of the City of Wilsonville Planning and Land
Development Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply.

TheSROZrepresentstheareawithintheouterboundaryof allinventoriedsignificantnaturalresources.
The Significant Resource Overlay Zone includes all land identified and protected under Metro's
UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Areas and Title 13 Habitat Conservation Areas, as currently
configured, significant wetlands, riparian corridors, and significant wildlife habitat that is inventoried
and mapped on the Wilsonville Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.03. Administration.

(.01)  Resources.Thetextprovisionsof thissectionshallbeusedtodeterminewhetherapplicationsmay
      be approved within the Significant Resource Overlay Zone. The following maps and documents
      may be used as references for identifying areas subject to the requirements of this Section:
      A.     Metro's UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Area maps.

      B.      TheFederalEmergencyManagementAgency(FEMA)FloodInsuranceRateMaps(FIRM).
      C.     The Wilsonville Local Wetland Inventory (LWI) (1998).

      D.     The Wilsonville Riparian Corridor Inventory (RCI) (1998).
      E.     Locally adopted studies or maps.
      F.      City of Wilsonville slope analysis maps.

      G.     Clackamas and Washington County soils surveys.

                                                      CD4:282
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.139.03

      H.     Metro's UGMFP Title 13 Habitat Conservation Area Map.

(.02)  Impact Area. The "Impact Area" is the area adjacent to the outer boundary of a Significant
      Resource within which development or other alteration activities may be permitted through the
      review of an SRIR (Significant Resource Impact Report). Where it can be clearly determined by
      the Planning Director that development is only in the Impact Area and there is no impact to the
      SignificantResource,developmentmaybepermittedwithoutSRIRreview.Theimpactareais25
      feetwideunlessotherwisespecifiedinthisordinanceorbythedecisionmakingbody.Designation
      of anImpactAreaisrequiredbyStatewidePlanningGoal5.Theprimarypurposeof theImpact
      Area is to ensure that development does not encroach into the SROZ.

(.03)  SignificantResourceImpactReport(SRIR). For proposed non-exempt development within the
      SROZ, the applicant shall submit a Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR) as part of any
      application for a development permit.

(.04)  ProhibitedActivities.Newstructures,developmentandconstructionactivitiesshallnotbepermit-
      ted within the SROZ if they will negatively impact significant natural resources. Gardens, lawns,
      applicationof chemicals,uncontainedareasof hazardousmaterialsasdefinedbyDEQ,domestic
      animal waste, dumping of materials of any kind, or other activities shall not be permitted within
      the SROZ if they will negatively impact water quality.

      Unauthorized land clearing or grading of a site to alter site conditions is not allowed, and may
      result in the maximum requirement of mitigation/enhancement regardless of pre-existing condi-
      tions.

(.05)  Habitat-FriendlyDevelopmentPractices.Totheextentpracticable,developmentandconstruction
      activitiesthatencroachwithintheSignificantResourceOverlayZoneand/orImpactAreashallbe
      designed, located and constructed to:

      A.     Minimizegrading,removalof nativevegetation,disturbanceandremovalof nativesoils,and
             impervious area;

      B.      Minimize adverse hydrological impacts on water resources, such as using the practices
             described in Part (a) of Table NR-2, unless their use is prohibited by an applicable and
             requiredstateorfederalpermit,suchasapermitrequiredunderthefederalCleanWaterAct,
             33U.S.C.§§1251etseq.,orthefederalSafeDrinkingWaterAct,42U.S.C.§§300f etseq.,and
             including conditions or plans required by such permit;

      C.     Minimize impacts on wildlife corridors and fish passage, such as by using the practices
             described in Part (b) of Table NR-2; and

      D.     Consider using the practices described in Part (C) of Table NR-2.

                                                      CD4:283
§ 4.139.03                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                                      Table NR-2: Habitat-Friendly Development Practices
                        Part (A) Design and Construction Practices to Minimize Hydrologic Impacts
1.  Amend disturbed soils to original or higher level of porosity to regain infiltration and stormwater storage
    capacity.
2.  Use pervious paving materials for residential driveways, parking lots and walkways.
3.  Incorporate stormwater management in road right-of ways.
4.  Landscape with rain gardens to provide on-lot detention, filtering of rainwater and groundwater re-charge.
5.  Use green roofs for runoff reduction, energy savings, improved air quality, and enhanced aesthetics.
6.  Disconnect downspouts from roofs and direct the flow to vegetated infiltration/filtration areas such as rain
    gardens.
7.  Retain rooftop runoff in a rain barrel for later on-lot use in lawn and garden watering.
8.  Use multi-functional open drainage systems in lieu of more conventional curb and gutter systems.
9.  Use bioretention cells as rain gardens in landscaped parking lot islands to reduce runoff volume and filter
    pollutants.
10.  Apply a treatment train approach to provide multiple opportunities for storm water treatment and reduce
      the possibility of system failure.
11.  Reduce sidewalk width and grade them such that they drain to the front yard of a residential lot or reten-
      tion area.
12.  Reduce impervious impacts of residential driveways by narrowing widths and moving access to the rear of
      the site.
13.  Use shared driveways.
14.  Reduce width of residential streets, depending on traffic and parking needs.
15.  Reduce street length, primarily in residential areas, by encouraging clustering and using curvilinear designs.
16.  Reduce cul-de-sac radii and use pervious vegetated islands in center to minimize impervious effects, and
      allow them to be utilized for truck maneuvering/loading to reduce need for wide loading areas on site.
16.  Minimize car spaces and stall dimensions, reduce parking ratios, and use shared parking facilities and struc-
      tured parking.
17.  Minimize the number of steam crossings and place crossing perpendicular to stream channel, if possible.
18.  Allow narrow street right-of-ways through stream corridors whenever possible to reduce adverse impacts of
      transportation corridors.
      Part (B) Design and Construction Practices to Minimize Impacts on Wildlife Corridors and Fish Passage
1.  Carefully integrate fencing into the landscape to guide animals toward animal crossings under, over, oraround transportation corridors.

2.  Use bridge crossings rather than culverts, wherever possible.
3.  If culverts are utilized, install slab, arch or box type culverts, preferably using bottomless designs that more
    closely mimic stream bottom habitat.
4.  Design stream crossings for fish passage with shelves and other design features to facilitate terrestrial wildlife
    passage.
5.  Extend vegetative cover through the wildlife crossing in the migratory route, along with sheltering areas.
                    Part (C) Miscellaneous Other Habitat Friendly Design and Construction Practices
1.  Use native vegetation throughout the development.
2.  Locate landscaping adjacent to SROZ.
3.  Reduce light spill-off into SROZ areas from development.
4.  Preserve and maintain existing trees and tree canopy coverage, and plant trees, where appropriate, to maxi-
    mize future tree canopy coverage.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

                                                                 CD4:284
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.139.04

Section  4.139.04. Uses and Activities Exempt from These Regulations.

A request for exemption shall be consistent with the submittal requirements listed under Section
4.139.06(.01)(B—I), as applicable to the exempt use and activity.
      (.01)  Emergency procedures or emergency activities undertaken which are necessary for the
             protection of public health, safety, and welfare. Measures to remove or abate hazards and
             nuisances. Areas within the SROZ that are disturbed because of emergency procedures or
             activities should be repaired and mitigated.
      (.02)  Maintenance and repair of buildings, structures, yards, gardens or other activities or uses
             that were in existence prior to the effective date of these regulations.

      (.03)  Alterations of buildings or accessory structures which do not increase building coverage.
      (.04)  The following agricultural activities lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this
             ordinance:
             A.     Mowing of hay, grass or grain crops.
             B.      Tilling, disking, planting, seeding, harvesting and related activities for pasture, tree
                    crops,commercialwoodlots,foodcropsorbusinesscrops,providedthatnoadditional
                    lands within the SROZ are converted to these uses after the effective date of  this
                    ordinance.

      (.05)  Operation, maintenance, and repair of irrigation and drainage ditches, constructed ponds,
             wastewaterfacilities,stormwaterdetentionorretentionfacilities,andwaterfacilitiesconsis-
             tent with the Stormwater Master Plan or the Comprehensive Plan.
      (.06)  Maintenanceandrepairof streetsandutilityserviceswithinrights-of way,easements,access
             drives or other previously improved areas.

      (.07)  Normal and routine maintenance and repair of any public improvement or public recre-
             ational area regardless of its location.

      (.08)  Theconstructionof newroads,pedestrianorbikepathsintotheSROZinordertoprovide
             accesstothesensitiveareaoracrossthesensitivearea,providedthelocationof thecrossing
             isconsistentwiththeintentof theWilsonvilleComprehensivePlan.Roadsandpathsshallbe
             constructed so as to minimize and repair disturbance to existing vegetation and slope
             stability.

      (.09)  Maintenance and repair of existing railroad tracks and related improvements.

      (.10)  Theremovalof invasivevegetationsuchasHimalayanBlackberry,EnglishIvy,PoisonOak,
             Scots (Scotch) Broom or as defined as invasive in the Metro Native Plant List.

      (.11)  Theplantingorpropagationof anyplantidentifiedasnativeontheMetroNativePlantList.
             See Wilsonville Planning Division to obtain a copy of this list.
      (.12)  Grading for the purpose of enhancing the Significant Resource as approved by the City.

      (.13)  Enhancement of the riparian corridor or wetlands for water quality or quantity benefits,
             fish,orwildlifehabitatasapprovedbytheCityandotherappropriateregulatoryauthorities.

                                                       CD4:285
§ 4.139.04                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.14)  Flood control activities pursuant to the Stormwater Master Plan, save and except those
             stormwater facilities subject to Class II Administrative Review, as determined by the Plan-
             ning Director, to ensure such facilities meet applicable standards under federal, state and
             local laws, rules and regulations.

      (.15)  Developments that propose a minor encroachment into the Significant Resource Overlay
             Zone. The purpose of  this adjustment would be to allow for minor encroachments of
             impervious surfaces such as accessory buildings, eave overhangs, building appurtenances,
             buildingaccessandexitingrequirementsorothersimilarfeature.Thetotaladjustmentshall
             not exceed 120 square feet in cumulative area.

      (.16)  Theexpansionof anexistingsinglefamilydwellingorduplexnotexceeding600squarefeet
             in area. The expansion of an existing single family dwelling or duplex or structures that are
             accessorytoasinglefamilydwellingorduplexinsidetheSROZ,providedthatthefollowing
             criteriahavebeensatisfied.AnSRIRisnotrequiredtoevaluateandreachadecisiononthe
             issuance of a permit to expand a single-family residence under this paragraph.
             A.     Theexpansionof asinglefamilyorduplexstructureorimprovement(includingdecks
                    and patios) shall not be located any closer to the stream or wetland area than the
                    existing structure or improvement; and
             B.      The coverage of all structures within the SROZ on the subject parcel shall not be
                    increasedbymorethan600squarefeet,basedonthecoverageinexistencepriortothe
                    effective date of this ordinance; and,
             C.     Theapplicantmustobtaintheapprovalof anerosionandsedimentcontrolplanfrom
                    the City's Building and Environmental Services Divisions; and,
             D.     No part of the expansion is located within the Metro UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality
                    Area.

      (.17)  NewSingle-FamilyDwellingorDuplex.Theconstructionof anewsinglefamilydwellingor
             duplex,includingaduplexcreatedthroughconversionof anexistingdetachedsingle-family
             dwelling, is exempt unless the building encroaches into the Impact Area and/or the SROZ.
             A.     If the proposed building encroaches only into the Impact Area then an abbreviated
                    SRIR may be required as specified in Section 4.139.05, unless it can be clearly
                    determined by the Planning Director that the development proposal will have no
                    impact on the Significant Resource. The primary purpose of the Impact Area is to
                    insurethatdevelopmentdoesnotencroachintotheSROZ.Developmentotherwisein
                    compliance with the Planning and Land Development Ordinance may be authorized
                    within the Impact Area.
             B.      If the proposed building encroaches into the SROZ, then a complete or abbreviated
                    SRIR report is required.

      (.18)  Private or public service connection laterals and service utility extensions.

      (.19)  A Stage II development permit or other development permits issued by the City and
             approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

                                                      CD4:286
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                             § 4.139.05

      (.20)  Theinstallationof publicstreetsandutilitiesspecificallymappedwithinamunicipalutility
             master plan, the Transportation Systems Plan or a capital improvement plan.

      (.21)  Structureswhicharenon-conformingtothestandardsof thisSectionmaybere-builtinthe
             eventof damageduetofireorothernaturalhazardsubjecttoSections4.189—4.192of the
             PlanningandLandDevelopmentOrdinance,providedthatthestructureisplacedwithinthe
             samefoundationlines(SeeFigureNR-6.).AnSRIRisnotrequiredtoevaluateandreacha
             decision on the issuance of a permit to replace a structure subject to this paragraph.

      (.22)  Any impacts to resource functions from the above excepted activities, such as gravel
             construction pads, erosion/sediment control materials or damaged vegetation, shall be
             mitigated using appropriate repair or restoration/enhancement techniques.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

Section  4.139.05. Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map Verification.

ThemapverificationrequirementsdescribedinthisSectionshallbemetatthetimeanapplicantrequests
a building permit, grading permit, tree removal permit, land division approval, or other land use
decision.MapverificationshallnotbeusedtodisputewhetherthemappedSignificantResourceOverlay
Zone boundary is a significant natural resource. Map refinements are subject to the requirements of
Section 4.139.10(.01)(D).

      (.01)  Inordertoconfirmthelocationof theSignificantResourceOverlayZone,mapverification
             shall be required or allowed as follows:
             A.     DevelopmentthatisproposedtobeeitherintheSignificantResourceOverlayZoneor
                   lessthan100feetoutsideof theboundaryof theSignificantResourceOverlayZone,as
                   shown on the Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map.
             B.      A lot or parcel that:
                   1.      Either contains the Significant Resource Overlay Zone, or any part of which is
                          lessthan100feetoutsidetheboundaryof theSignificantResourceOverlayZone,
                          as shown on the Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map; and

                                                     CD4:287
§ 4.139.05                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                   2.      Isthesubjectof alanduseapplicationforapartition,subdivision,oranylanduse
                          applicationthattheapprovalof whichwouldauthorizenewdevelopmentonthe
                          subject lot or parcel.

      (.02)  An application for Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map Verification may be submitted
             even if one is not required pursuant to Section 4.139.05(.01).
      (.03)  If alotorparcelorparcelissubjecttoSection4.139.05(.01),anapplicationforSignificant
             ResourceOverlayZoneMapVerificationshallbefiledconcurrentlywiththeotherlanduse
             applications referenced in Section 4.139.05(.01)(B)(2) unless a previously approved Signifi-
             cant Resource Overlay Zone Map Verification for the subject property remains valid.

      (.04)  AnapplicantforSignificantResourceOverlayZoneMapVerificationshalluseoneormore
             of the following methods to verify the Significant Resource Overlay Zone boundary:
             A.     Theapplicantmayconcurwiththeaccuracyof theSignificantResourceOverlayZone
                   Map of the subject property;
             B.      The applicant may demonstrate a mapping error was made in the creation of the
                   Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map; and
             C.     Theapplicantmaydemonstratethatthesubjectpropertywasdevelopedlawfullyprior
                   to June 7, 2001.

      (.05)  The Planning Director shall determine the location of any Significant Resource Overlay
             Zone on the subject property by considering information submitted by the applicant,
             information collected during any site visit that may be made to the subject property,
             information generated by Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map Verification that has
             occurredonadjacentproperties,andanyotherrelevantinformationthathasbeenprovided.
      (.06)  ForapplicationsfiledpursuanttoSection4.139.05(.04)(A)and(C),aSignificantResource
             Overlay Zone Map Verification shall be consistent with the submittal requirements listed
             under Section 4.139.06(.01)(B-H).

      (.07)  ForapplicationsfiledpursuanttoSection4.139.05(.04)(B),aSignificantResourceOverlay
             Zone Map Verification shall be consistent with the submittal requirements listed under
             Section 4.139.06(.02)(D)(1).
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.06. Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR) and Review Criteria.

A Significant Resource Impact Report (SRIR) is a report that delineates specific resource boundaries
and analyzes the impacts of development within mapped significant resource areas based upon the
requirements of this Section. An SRIR is only required for non-exempt development that is located
within the Significant Resource Overlay Zone and/or its associated 25 foot Impact Area.

The Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map identifies areas that have been classified as significant
natural resources. The preparation of the Significant Resource Overlay Zone Map did not include
specificfieldobservationsof everyindividualproperty.Thesemapsaredesignedtobespecificenoughto
determinewhetherfurtherenvironmentalreviewof adevelopmentproposalisnecessary.If anyportion

                                                      CD4:288
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.139.06

of thedevelopmentoralterationof theland(exceptthoseexemptedbythisSection)islocatedwithinthe
Significant Resource Overlay Zone boundary or the identified Impact Area, then an SRIR is required
before any development permit can be issued. Where it can be clearly determined by the Planning
DirectorthatdevelopmentisonlyintheImpactAreaandthereisnoimpacttotheSignificantResource,
development may be permitted without SRIR review.

The Planning Director may consult with a professional with appropriate expertise to evaluate an
applicant's SRIR prepared under this Section or may rely on appropriate staff expertise, in order to
properly evaluate the report's conclusions.

      (.01)  AbbreviatedSRIRRequirements.Itistheintentof thissubsectiontoprovideauser-friendly
             process for the applicant. Only the materials necessary for the application review are
             required.Atthediscretionof thePlanningDirector,anabbreviatedSRIRmaybesubmitted
             for certain small-scale developments such as single family dwellings, additions to single
             familydwellings,minoradditionsandaccessorystructures.Thefollowingrequirementsshall
             be prepared and submitted as part of the abbreviated SRIR evaluation:

             A.     A Site Development Permit Application must be submitted in compliance with the
                    Planning and Land Development Ordinance;

             B.      Outline of any existing features including, but not limited to, structures, decks, areas
                    previously disturbed and existing utility locations*;

             C.     Location of any wetlands or water bodies on the site and the location of the stream
                    centerline and top-of-bank;

             D.     Withintheareaproposedtobedisturbed,thelocation,sizeandspeciesof alltreesthat
                    are more than six inches in diameter at breast height (DBH). Trees outside the area
                    proposed to be disturbed may be individually shown or shown as drip line with an
                    indication of species type or types;

             E.     The location of the SROZ and Impact Area boundaries*;

             F.      A minimum of three slope cross-section measurements transecting the site, equally
                    spaced at no more than 100-foot increments. The measurements should be made
                    perpendicular to the stream*;

             G.     A map that delineates the Metro UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Area
                    boundary (using Metro Title 3 field observed standards)*;

             H.     Currentphotosof siteconditionsshallbeprovidedtosupplementtheaboveinforma-
                    tion*; and

             I.      A narrative describing the possible and probable impacts to natural resources and a
                    plan to mitigate for such impacts*.

             *Indicates information that City Staff may have readily available to assist an applicant.

                                                      CD4:289
§ 4.139.06                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.02)  Application Requirements for a Standard SRIR. The following requirements must be pre-
             pared and submitted as part of the SRIR evaluation for any development not included in
             paragraph A above:

             A.     A Site Development Permit Application must be submitted in compliance with the
                    Planning and Land Development Ordinance.

             B.      TheSRIRshallbeconductedandpreparedbyanaturalresourceprofessionalknowl-
                    edgeable and qualified to complete such a report.

             C.     Thequalificationsof thepersonorpersonspreparingeachelementof theanalysisshall
                    be included with the SRIR.

             D.     The SRIR shall include the following:
                    1.      Physical Analysis. The analysis shall include, at a minimum:
                           a.      Soil types;
                           b.      Geology;
                           c.      Hydrology of the site;
                           d.      Outline of any existing features including, but not limited to, structures,
                                  decks, areas previously disturbed, and existing utility locations;
                           e.      Locationof anywetlandsorwaterbodiesonthesiteandthelocationof the
                                  stream centerline and top-of-bank;
                           f.       Within the area proposed to be disturbed, the location, size and species of
                                  alltreesthataremorethansixinchesDBH.Treesoutsidetheareaproposed
                                  to be disturbed may be individually shown or shown as drip line with an
                                  indication of species type or types;
                           g.      A property survey together with topography shown by contour lines pre-
                                  pared at two-foot vertical intervals. Five-foot vertical intervals may be
                                  allowedforsteepslopedareas.ThesurveyshallbepreparedbyanOregon
                                  Registered Land Surveyor or Civil Engineer;
                           h.      The location of the SROZ and Impact Area boundaries;
                           i.       Aminimumof threeslopecross-sectionmeasurementstransectingthesite,
                                  equally spaced at no more than 100-foot increments. The measurements
                                  should be made perpendicular to the stream;
                           j.       AmapthatdelineatestheMetroUGMFPTitle3WaterQualityResource
                                  Area boundary (using Metro Title 3 field observed standards);
                           k.      AmapthatdelineatestheGoal5safeharborboundary(usingthestandards
                                  found within the Oregon Administrative Rule OAR 660-23(1996));
                           l.       The existing site significant resource conditions shall be determined and
                                  identified by a natural resource professional; and
                           m.     Current photos of  site conditions shall be provided to supplement the
                                  above information.

                                                       CD4:290
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.139.06

                    2.      The analysis shall include development recommendations including grading
                           procedures, soil erosion control measures, slope stabilization measures, and
                           methods of  mitigating hydrologic impacts. For projects that affect possible
                           wetlands,acopyof theLocalWetlandInventory(LWI)mappertainingtothesite
                           shallbeprovided.Noticeof theproposalshallbegiventotheOregonDivisionof
                           State Lands and the Army Corp of Engineers.
                    3.      Ecological Analysis. The Ecological Analysis shall include a map, using the
                           PhysicalAnalysismapasabase,showingthedelineatedboundariesandcoverage
                           of wetlands, riparian corridors, and wildlife habitat resources identified on the
                           site.
                           a.      Wetland boundaries shall be delineated using the method currently ac-
                                 cepted by the Oregon Division of State Lands and the US Army Corps of
                                 Engineers. Riparian boundaries shall be delineated using the riparian
                                 corridor descriptions in this ordinance. Boundaries of  mapped Goal 5
                                 wildlife habitat shall be verified by field observation.
                           b.      The analysis shall include an inventory that lists and describes the native
                                 andornamentaldominantandsub-dominantgroundcover,shrubandtree
                                 species occurring on the site and wildlife observed during at least one site
                                 visit (specify date). The report shall also include recommended measures
                                 forminimizingtheadverseimpactsof theproposeddevelopmentonunique
                                 and/or significant features of the ecosystem. The analysis shall include a
                                 reportthatdiscussestheecologicalfunctionsandvaluesof theSROZarea,
                                 discussing each parameter listed below. The discussion shall be based on
                                 actual field observations and data obtained by a natural resource profes-
                                 sional.
                           c.      Wetlands(basedonevaluationcriteriaintheOregonFreshwaterWetlands
                                 Assessment Methodology (OFWAM), Oregon Division of State Lands):
                                 i.       Wildlife habitat diversity
                                 ii.      Fish habitat
                                 iii.     Water quality protection
                                 iv.     Hydrologic control
                           d.      Wildlife Habitat (includes riparian corridors and upland forested areas)1:
                                 i.       Wildlife habitat diversity
                                 ii.      Water quality protection
                                 iii.     Ecological integrity
                                 iv.     Connectivity
                                 v.      Uniqueness

1 Based on criteria developed for the City of Wilsonville by Fisherman Environmental Services, in the
NaturalResourcesInventoryandGoal5/Title3/ESAComplianceandProtectionPlan:InventoryUpdate,
1999-2000

                                                       CD4:291
§ 4.139.06                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                          e.      Riparian Corridors 1. Stream-riparian ecosystems:
                                 i.       Presence and abundance of  Large Woody Debris (LWD) in and
                                        adjacent to stream.
                                 ii.      Tree/shrub canopy stream shade production (water temperature and
                                        aquatic plant growth control).
                                 iii.     Erosion and sediment control by riparian vegetation.
                                 iv.     Water quality protection by riparian vegetation.
                                 v.      River-floodplain ecosystem (Willamette River).
                                 vi.     Presence of functional floodplain (inundated annually).
                                 vii.    Type and condition of functional floodplain vegetation.
                                 viii.   Use of river-floodplain by ESA-listed species.
                                 ix.     Roleaswildlifecorridorconnectingsignificantwildlifehabitatareas.
                    4.      Mitigation and Enhancement Proposal. The applicant must propose a Signifi-
                          cant Resource mitigation and enhancement plan as part of  the SRIR. The
                          mitigationandenhancementshallincreasethenaturalvaluesandqualityof the
                          remaining Significant Resource lands located on the site or other location as
                          approvedbytheCity.Themitigationandenhancementproposalshallconformto
                          the mitigation standards identified in this Section.
                    5.      Waiver of Documentation: The Planning Director may waive the requirement
                          thatanSRIRbepreparedwheretherequiredinformationhasalreadybeenmade
                          available to the City, or may waive certain provisions where the Director deter-
                          mines that the information is not necessary to review the application. Such
                          waiversmaybeappropriateforsmall-scaledevelopmentsandshallbeprocessed
                          under Administrative Review. Where such waivers are granted by the Planning
                          Director,theDirectorshallclearlyindicatethereasonsfordoingsointherecord,
                          citing the relevant information relied upon in reaching the decision.

      (.03)  SRIR Review Criteria. In addition to the normal Site Development Permit Application
             requirements as stated in the Planning and Land Development Ordinance, the following
             standards shall apply to the issuance of  permits requiring an SRIR. The SRIR must
             demonstrate how these standards are met in a manner that meets the purposes of  this
             Section.
             A.     Except as specifically authorized by this Code, development shall be permitted only
                    within the Area of Limited Conflicting Use (see definition) found within the SROZ;
             B.      Except as specifically authorized by this Code, no development is permitted within
                    Metro'sUrbanGrowthManagementFunctionalPlanTitle3WaterQualityResource
                    Areas boundary;
             C.     No more than five percent of the Area of Limited Conflicting Use (see definition)
                    locatedonapropertymaybeimpactedbyadevelopmentproposal.Onpropertiesthat
                    are large enough to include Areas of Limited Conflicting Use on both sides of a
                    waterway, no more than five percent of the Area of Limited Conflicting Use on each

                                                       CD4:292
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.139.07

                    side of  the riparian corridor may be impacted by a development proposal. This
                    condition is cumulative to any successive development proposals on the subject prop-
                    erty such that the total impact on the property shall not exceed five percent;

             D.     Mitigationof theareatobeimpactedshallbeconsistentwithSection4.139.06of this
                    Code and shall occur in accordance with the provisions of this Section;

             E.     TheimpactontheSignificantResourceisminimizedbylimitingthedegreeormagni-
                    tude of the action, by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to
                    avoid, reduce or mitigate impacts;

             F.      TheimpactstotheSignificantResourceswillberectifiedbyrestoring,rehabilitating,or
                    creating enhanced resource values within the "replacement area" (see definitions) on
                    the site or, where mitigation is not practical on-site, mitigation may occur in another
                    location approved by the City;

             G.     Non-structural fill used within the SROZ area shall primarily consist of  natural
                    materials similar to the soil types found on the site;

             H.     Theamountof fillusedshallbetheminimumrequiredtopracticallyachievetheproject
                    purpose;

             I.      Otherthanmeasurestakentominimizeturbidityduringconstruction,streamturbidity
                    shall not be significantly increased by any proposed development or alteration of the
                    site; and

             J.       Appropriate federal and state permits shall be obtained prior to the initiation of any
                    activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Oregon Division of
                    State Lands in any jurisdictional wetlands or water of the United States or State of
                    Oregon, respectively.

Section  4.139.07. Mitigation Standards.

Thefollowingmitigationstandardsapplytosignificantwildlifehabitatresourceareasforencroachments
within the Area of Limited Conflicting Uses, and shall be followed by those proposing such encroach-
ments. Wetland mitigation shall be conducted as per permit conditions from the US Army Corps of
EngineersandOregonDivisionof StateLands.Whileimpactsaregenerallynotallowedintheriparian
corridorresourcearea,permittedimpactsshallbemitigatedby:usingthesemitigationstandardsif the
impactsaretowildlifehabitatvalues;andusingstateandfederalprocessesif theimpactsaretowetland
resourcesintheripariancorridor.Mitigationisnotrequiredfortreeslosttoanaturaleventsuchaswind
or floods.

      (.01)  The applicant shall review the appropriate Goal 5 Inventory Summary Sheets for wildlife
             habitat (i.e. upland) contained in the City of Wilsonville Natural Resource Inventory and
             Goal 5/Title 3/ESA Compliance and Protection Plan ("Compliance and Protection Plan" -
             May 2000) to determine the resource function ratings at the time the inventory was con-
             ducted.

                                                       CD4:293
§ 4.139.07                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.02)  TheapplicantshallprepareaMitigationPlandocumentcontainingthefollowingelements:
             A.     The Mitigation Plan shall contain an assessment of  the existing natural resource
                    functionratingsatthetimeof theproposedencroachmentforthesitecomparedtothe
                    function ratings recorded in the Compliance and Protection Plan.

             B.      TheMitigationPlanshallcontainanassessmentof theanticipatedadverseimpactsto
                    significant wildlife habitat resources. The impact assessment shall discuss impacts by
                    resource functions (as listed in the Compliance and Protection Plan, May 2000) for
                    each resource type, and shall map the area of impact (square feet or acres) for each
                    function.

             C.     TheMitigationPlanshallpresentaproposedmitigationactiondesignedtoreplacethe
                    lost or impacted resource functions described in Subsection B, above. The mitigation
                    planshallbedesignedtoreplacelostorimpactedfunctionsbyenhancementof existing
                    resources on, or off the impact site, or creation of new resource areas.
             D.     For mitigation projects based on resource function enhancement, the area ratios
                    presented in Table NR-2 shall be applied. These ratios are based on the resource
                    functionratingsatthetimeof theproposedaction,asdescribedinSubsectionA,above.
                    Themitigationactionshallbeconductedontheappropriatesizeareaasdeterminedby
                    the ratios in Table NR-2.

             E.     The Mitigation Plan shall include a planting plan containing the following elements:
                    1.     RequiredPlantsandPlantDensities. All trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be
                           nativevegetation.AnapplicantshallcomplywithSection4.139.06(.02)(E)(1)(a)
                           or(b),whicheverresultsinmoretreeplantings,exceptwherethedisturbancearea
                           isoneacreormore,theapplicantshallcomplywithSection4.139.06(.02)(E)(1)(b).
                           a.      The mitigation requirement shall be calculated based on the number and
                                  sizeof treesthatareremovedfromthesite.Treesthatareremovedfromthe
                                  site shall be replaced as shown in Table NR-3. Conifers shall be replaced
                                  withconifers.Baregroundshallbeplantedorseededwithnativegrassesor
                                  herbs.

                                                  Table NR-3: Tree Replacement Requirements
                                     Size of Tree to be Removed                    Number of Trees and Shrubs
                                (inches in diameter at breast height)                        to be Planted
                                                  6 to 12                                          2 trees and 3 shrubs
                                              over 12 to 18                                     3 trees and 6 shrubs
                                              over 18 to 24                                    5 trees and 12 shrubs
                                              over 24 to 30                                    7 trees and 18 shrubs
                                                  over 30                                       10 trees and 30 shrubs
                           b.      The mitigation requirement shall be calculated based on the size of the
                                  disturbancewithintheSignificantResourceOverlayZone.Nativetreesand
                                  shrubs shall be planted at a rate of five trees and 25 shrubs per every 500
                                  square feet of  disturbance area (calculated by dividing the number of

                                                        CD4:294
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.139.07

                          square feet of disturbance area by 500, and then multiplying that result
                          times five trees and 25 shrubs, and rounding all fractions to the nearest
                          wholenumberof treesandshrubs;forexample,if therewillbe330square
                          feetof disturbancearea,then330dividedby500equals0.66,and0.66times
                          fiveequals3.3,sothreetreesshallbeplanted,and0.66times25equals16.5,
                          so17shrubsshallbeplanted).Baregroundshallbeplantedorseededwith
                          native grasses or herbs.
             2.     PlantSize. Replacement trees and shrubs shall be at least one-gallon in size and
                   shall be at least 12 inches in height.
             3.     Plant Spacing. Trees shall be planted between eight and 12 feet on center, and
                   shrubsshallbeplantedbetweenfourandfivefeetoncenter,orclusteredinsingle
                   species groups of no more than four plants, with each cluster planted between
                   eightandtenfeetoncenter.Whenplantingnearexistingtrees,thedriplineof the
                   existing tree shall be the starting point for plant spacing measurements.
             4.     PlantDiversity.Shrubsshallconsistof atleasttwodifferentspecies.If fivetreesor
                   moreareplanted,thennomorethan50percentof thetreesmaybeof thesame
                   genus.
             5.     InvasiveVegetation. Invasive non-native or noxious vegetation shall be removed
                   within the mitigation area prior to planting, and shall be removed or controlled
                   for five years following the date that the mitigation planting is completed.
             6.     MulchingandBrowseProtection.Mulchshallbeappliedaroundnewplantingsat
                   aminimumof threeinchesindepthand18inchesindiameter.Browseprotection
                   shall be installed on trees and shrubs. Mulching and browse protection shall be
                   maintained during the two-year plant establishment period.
             7.     TreeandShrubSurvival.Treesandshrubsthatdieshallbereplacedinkindtothe
                   extentnecessarytoensurethataminimumof 80percentof thetreesandshrubs
                   initially required shall remain alive on the fifth anniversary of the date that the
                   mitigation planting is completed.

(.03)  Proposalsformitigationactionwherenewnaturalresourcefunctionsandvaluesarecreated
      (i.e.creatingwetlandorwildlifehabitatwhereitdoesnotpresentlyexist)willbereviewedand
      maybeapprovedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardorPlanningDirectorif itisdetermined
      thattheproposedactionwillcreatenaturalresourcefunctionsandvaluesthatareequaltoor
      greater than those lost by the proposed impact activity.

(.04)  Mitigationactionsshallbeimplementedpriortooratthesametimeastheimpactactivityis
      conducted.

(.05)  Mitigation plans shall have clearly stated goals and measurable performance standards.

(.06)  Allmitigationplansshallcontainamonitoringandmaintenanceplantobeconductedfora
      periodof fiveyearsfollowingmitigationimplementation.Theapplicantshallberesponsible
      for ongoing maintenance and management activities, and shall submit an annual report to
      the Planning Director documenting such activities, and reporting progress towards the

                                               CD4:295
§ 4.139.07                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

               mitigation goals. The report shall contain, at a minimum, photographs from established
               photo points, quantitative measure of success criteria, including plant survival and vigor if
               these are appropriate data. The Year 1 annual report shall be submitted one year following
               mitigation action implementation. The final annual report (Year 5 report) shall document
               successful satisfaction of mitigation goals, as per the stated performance standards. If the
               ownership of the mitigation site property changes, the new owners will have the continued
               responsibilities established by this section.

       (.07)  The Mitigation Plan document shall be prepared by a natural resource professional.
       (.08)  Priortoanysiteclearing,gradingorconstruction,theSROZareashallbestaked,andfenced
               perapprovedplan.Duringconstruction,theSROZareashallremainfencedandundisturbed
               except as allowed by an approved development permit.

       (.09)  For any development which creates multiple parcels intended for separate ownership, the
               City shall require that the SROZ areas on the site be encumbered with a conservation
               easement or tract.

       (.10)  TheCitymayrequireaconservationeasementovertheSROZthatwouldpreventtheowner
               from activities and uses inconsistent with the purpose of this Section and any easements
               therein. The purpose of the conservation easement is to conserve and protect resources as
               well as to prohibit certain activities that are inconsistent with the purposes of this section.
               Such conservation easements do not exclude the installation of utilities.

       (.11)  At the Planning Directors discretion, mitigation requirements may be modified based on
               minimizationof impactsattheimpactactivitysite.Wheresuchmodificationsaregrantedby
               the Planning Director, the Director shall clearly indicate the reasons for doing so in the
               record, citing the relevant information relied upon in reaching the decision.

       (.12)  TheDirectormaystudythepossibilityof apayment-in-lieu-of systemfornaturalresource
               impact mitigation. This process would involve the public acquisition and management of
               natural resource properties partially funded by these payments.

          TABLE NR-4: NATURAL RESOURCE ENHANCEMENT MITIGATION RATIOS

                                              ExistingFunction*             ProposedFunction*
              ExistingFunction*                     Ratingat                       Ratingat                       AreaRatio
            RatingatImpactSite                  MitigationSite                  MitigationSite             (Mitigation:Impact)
                          L                                    L                                    M                                   2:1
                          L                                    L                                    H                                1 ½ : 1
                          L                                    M                                   H                                  2 : 1
                         M                                    L                                    M                                  3 : 1
                         M                                    L                                    H                                  2 : 1
                         M                                   M                                   H                                2 ½ : 1
                         H                                    L                                    M                                  4 : 1
                         H                                    L                                    H                                  3 : 1
                         H                                   M                                   H                                2 ½ : 1

                                                              CD4:296
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.139.07

                                         ExistingFunction*           ProposedFunction*
             ExistingFunction*                 Ratingat                    Ratingat                   AreaRatio
           RatingatImpactSite              MitigationSite              MitigationSite           (Mitigation:Impact)
                       H                                    H                                  H+                                 5 : 1
             * mitigationfunction (i.e. waterquality, ecological integrity) shallbe the same as impacted function
             + improve on a H rating
             NOTE: These mitigation ratios were created by specifically for the Natural Resources Plan by Fishman Environ-
                      mental Services.
Examples for using Table NR-4—The Doe Property

TheDoeproperty(fictitious)wasratedasasignificantwildlifehabitatsiteinthe2000Complianceand
ProtectionPlanreportwiththefollowingfunctionratings:wildlifehabitat,L(lowplantdiversity);water
quality protection, M (adjacent to the Willamette River); ecological integrity, L (a planted woodland);
connectivity,M(adjacenttolargerforestunit);anduniqueness,L(nosensitivespeciesoruniquenatural
features).In2015,thefunctionratingsweredeterminedtobethesame,exceptforwildlifehabitat,which
increased to M and ecological integrity, which rated M, both due to an increase in native plant species
diversityandareductioninHimalayanblackberryresultingfromgoodstewardshippracticesbytheDoe
family.AprojectproposedbytheDoeswouldremove0.2acreof trees,shrubsandgroundcoverplants
intheAreaof LimitedConflictingUseshavinganimpactonwildlifehabitatfunction.TheDoespropose
tomitigatefortheimpactbyenhancinganotherareaof theirpropertythathascontinuinginvasiveplant
problems. By removing blackberry, instituting a five-year blackberry control program, and planting/
maintainingnativeshrubs,theywillimprovethemitigationsiteratingsforwildlifehabitatandecological
integrityfromLtoM.UsingTableNR-2,theydeterminethata3:1ratiowillberequired,andtheyplan
to enhance 0.6 acres of the mitigation site.
      Calculation summary: existing function rating at impact site = M
             existing function rating at mitigation site = L
             proposed function rating at mitigation site = M
             Table NR-4 required ration = 3:1
             Impact area × 3 = 0.2 acre × 3 = 0.6 acre.
                    Note: both impacted functions are mitigated by the same action.
      Calculation summary:
             Wildlife Habitat function:
                    existing function rating at impact site = H
                    existing rating at mitigation site = H
                    proposed function rating at mitigation site = H+
                    Table NR-4 required ratio = 5:1
                    Impact area × 5 = 0.04 acre × 5 = 0.2 acre
             Water Quality Protection function:
                    existing function rating at impact site = H
                    existing rating at mitigation site = M

                                                        CD4:297
§ 4.139.07                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                    proposed function rating at mitigation site = H
                    Table NR-4 required ratio = 2½:1
                    Impact area × 2½ = 0.04 acre × 2½ = 0.1 acre
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.08. Activities Requiring a Class I Administrative Review Process.

(.01)  ClassIProcedureforAmendingtheSignificantResourceOverlayZoneBoundary.TheDirector
      mayauthorizeanadjustmenttotheSROZbyamaximumof twopercentof theAreaof Limited
      ConflictingUse.OnpropertiesthatarelargeenoughtoincludeAreasof LimitedConflictingUse
      on both sides of  a waterway or wetland, no more than two percent of  the Area of  Limited
      Conflicting Use on each side of the riparian corridor may be adjusted, provided the applicant
      demonstrates that the following standards are met:
      A.     The proposed adjustment is located in an Area of Limited Conflicting Use as determined
             through a site assessment and SRIR;

      B.      The area within the Significant Resource Overlay Zone is not reduced to less than the
             requirements of Metro's UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource Areas for the site;

      C.     Theadjustmentshallbelocatedintheoutermosttenpercentof thesignificantresourcearea
             asitrunsnearorparalleltoaripariancorridor.Wherenoripariancorridorexistsonthesite,
             theadjustmentshallbemadeinamannerwhichprotectsthehighestresourcevaluesonthe
             site;
      D.     The conclusions of the SRIR confirm that the area where the project is proposed does not
             significantly contribute to the protection of the remaining Significant Resource for water
             quality, storm water control and wildlife habitat;
      E.     The line to be adjusted has not been previously adjusted from the boundary location
             originally adopted as part of this Section; and
      F.      Thelandproposedtoberemovedthroughtheuseof thisadjustmentprocessdonotcontain
             more than three healthy trees, as determined by an arborist, that are greater than six inches
             DBH.
      G.     Any change to the SROZ boundary authorized through this Section shall be noted on the
             official zoning map of the City.

(.02)  Applications that do not meet all of the above criteria shall be processed as a Class II Adminis-
      trative Review.

Section  4.139.09. Activities Requiring a Class II Administrative Review Process.

(.01)  The review of any action requiring an SRIR except:
      A.     Activities and uses exempt under this Section;
      B.      Adjustments permitted as a Class I Administrative Review.

      C.     Adjustments permitted as part of a Development Review Board public hearing process.

                                                       CD4:298
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.139.09

(.02)  Singlefamilydwellingorduplexortheexpansionof asinglefamilydwellingonlotswithlimited
      buildableland.Singlefamilydwellingorduplexortheexpansionof asinglefamilydwellingwhich
      meet all of the following requirements:

      A.     The lot was legally created and has less than 5,000 square feet of buildable land located
             outside the SROZ; and

      B.      No more than one single family house or duplex is permitted on the property and no more
             than 3,000 square feet of land is to be developed by impervious improvements within the
             SROZ; and

      C.     Thesingle-familyorduplexstructureshallbesitedinalocation,whichreducestheimpacts
             to the Significant Resources.

      D.     An Abbreviated SRIR is required to be submitted.

(.03)  Theexpansionof anexistingsinglefamilydwellingorduplexorstructuresthatareaccessorytoa
      single-family dwelling or duplex located inside Metro's UGMFP Title 3 Water Quality Resource
      Areas.

      A.     Theexpansionof asinglefamilystructureorimprovementislocatednoclosertothestream
             or wetland area than the existing structures, roadways, driveways or accessory uses and
             development; and

      B.      Thecoverageof allstructuresshallnotbeincreasedbymorethan600squarefeet,basedon
             the coverage in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance; and

      C.     The applicant must obtain the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan from the
             City's Building and Environmental Services Divisions.

      D.     In determining appropriate conditions of approval, the applicant shall:

             1.      Demonstratethatnoreasonablyfeasiblealternativedesignormethodof development
                   existsthatwouldhavealesserimpactontheWaterQualityResourceAreathantheone
                   proposed; and

             2.      If nosuchreasonablyfeasiblealternativedesignormethodof developmentexists,the
                   project shall be conditioned to limit its disturbance and impact on the Water Quality
                   Resource to the minimum extent necessary to achieve the proposed addition, altera-
                   tion, restoration, replacement or rehabilitation; and

             3.      Provide mitigation consistent with Section 4.139.06 to ensure that impacts to the
                   functionsandvaluesof theWaterQualityResourceAreawillbemitigatedorrestored
                   to the extent practicable.

                                                      CD4:299
§ 4.139.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.139.10. Development Review Board (DRB) Process.

The following actions require review through a Development Review Board quasi-judicial process.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to require a hearing body to approve a request for a permit
under this Section.

      (.01)  Exceptions. The following exceptions may be authorized through a Development Review
             Board quasi-judicial review procedure.

             A.    UnbuildableLot.Forexistingnon-developedlotsthataredemonstratedtobeunbuild-
                    ablebytheprovisionsof thisSection,theSROZshallbereducedorremovedtoassure
                    thelotwillbebuildablebyallowingupto3,000squarefeetof landtobedevelopedby
                    impervious improvements for residential use, or 5,000 square feet of  impervious
                    improvements for non-residential uses, while still providing for the maximum protec-
                    tion of the significant resources, if not in conflict with any other requirements of the
                    Planning and Land Development Ordinance. This section shall not apply to lots
                    created after the effective date of this ordinance.

             B.    LargeLotException.Anexceptionunderthisparagraphisauthorizedandmayallow
                    impact into wetlands, riparian corridors and wildlife habitat areas, and shall not be
                    limited to locations solely within the Area of Limited Conflicting Use. Mitigation is
                    required, and for wetland impacts, state and federal permit requirements shall be
                    followed. An exception to the standards of this Section may be authorized where the
                    following conditions apply:
                    1.      The lot is greater than one acre in size; and
                    2.      At least 85 percent of the lot is located within the SROZ based on surveyed
                           resource and property line boundaries; and
                    3.      No more than ten percent of the area located within the SROZ on the property
                           may be excepted and used for development purposes; and

                    4.      Through the review of an SRIR, it is determined that a reduction of the SROZ
                           does not reduce the values listed on the City of Wilsonville Natural Resource
                           Function Rating Matrix for the resource site; and
                    5.      The proposal is sited in a location that avoids or minimizes impacts to the
                           significant resource to the greatest extent possible.
                    6.      For purposes of this subsection, "lot" refers to an existing legally created lot of
                           record as of the date of the adoption of the SROZ.
                    7.      Wherealotisproposedtobedividedformiddlehousing,theareaof thelotprior
                           to the land division shall be that used for the purpose of this subsection.

             C.    Public. If the application of this Section would prohibit a development proposal by a
                    public agency or public utility, the agency or utility may apply for an exception
                    pursuanttothisSection.ThehearingbodyshallusetheSRIRreviewcriteriaidentified
                    within this section.

                                                        CD4:300
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                             § 4.139.10

      D.    Map Refinement process. The applicant may propose to amend the SROZ boundary
             throughaDevelopmentReviewBoardquasi-judicialzonechangewheremoredetailed
             informationisprovided,suchasastateapprovedwetlanddelineation.Thecriteriafor
             amending the SROZ are as follows:
             1.      Anymaprefinementmustbeevaluatedbyconsideringtheripariancorridortypes
                   contained in this ordinance.
             2.      Othersupportingdocumentstobeconsideredinevaluatingaproposaltorefinea
                   map include, but are not limited to:
                   a.      Natural Resources Inventories (LWI/RCI);
                   b.      The Economic, Social, Environmental and Energy (ESEE) Analysis;
                   c.      Metro Functional Plans;
                   d.      Wilsonville Comprehensive Plan;
                   e.      State approved wetland delineations; and
                   f.       Detailed slope analysis.
             3.      AnSRIRmustbepreparedbytheapplicantinconformancewiththeprovisions
                   of this Section.
             4.      TheHearingBody(includingCityCouncil)mayamendtheSignificantResource
                   Overlay Zone (in or out) upon making a determination that the land area in
                   questionisorisnotasignificantresource.Thecriteriafordeterminingthatland
                   issignificantshallbebasedonfindingthatthesiteareahasatleastoneratingof
                   "high"usingthefunctioncriterialistedintheNaturalResourceFunctionRating
                   Matrices.
(.02)  AddingWetlands.Exceptforwaterqualityorstormwaterdetentionfacilities,theCityshall
      initiate amendments to the Significant Resource Overlay Zone maps to add wetlands when
      theCityreceivessignificantevidencethatawetlandmeetsanyoneof thefollowingcriteria:
      A.     The wetland is fed by surface flows, sheet flows or precipitation, and has evidence of
             floodingduringthegrowingseason,andhas60percentorgreatervegetatedcover,and
             is over one-half acre in size; or the wetland qualifies as having intact water quality
             function under the 1996 Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology; or
      B.      ThewetlandisintheMetroTitle3FloodManagementAreaascorrectedbythemost
             current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and has evidence of flooding during the
             growingseason,andisfiveacresormoreinsize,andhasarestrictedoutletornooutlet;
             or the wetland qualifies as having intact hydrologic control function under the 1996
             Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment Methodology; or
      C.     The wetland or a portion of the wetland is within a horizontal distance of less than
             one-fourth mile from a water body which meets the Department of Environmental
             Quality definition of water quality limited water body in OAR Chapter 340, Division
             41 (1996).
      D.     Createdorrestoredwetlandsthatmeettherequirementsof Section4.139.10(.02)shall
             be added to the Significant Resource Overlay Zone.

                                               CD4:301
§ 4.139.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.03)  Developmentof structures,additionsandimprovementsthatrelatetousesotherthansingle
             family residential.

      (.04)  Variances.Avariancemaybetakentoanyof theprovisionsof thisSectionperthestandards
             of Section 4.196 of the Planning and Land Development Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009)

Section  4.139.11. Special Provisions.

(.01)  Reducedfront,rearandsideyardsetback. Applications on properties containing the SROZ may
      reducethefront,rearandsideyardsetbackfordevelopmentsoradditionstoprotectthesignificant
      resource, as approved by the Development Review Board.

(.02)  Density Transfer. For residential development proposals on lands zoned Planned Development
      Residential (PDR) which contain land within the SROZ, a transfer of density shall be permitted
      withintheStageIMasterPlanarea.DensitycanonlybetransferredtolandoutsidetheSROZand
      withintheStageIMasterPlanarea.TheformulainA.throughB.belowshallbeusedtocalculate
      the density that may be transferred.

      A.    Step1. Calculate Expected Maximum Density. The Expected Maximum Density (EMD) is
             calculatedbymultiplyingthegrossacreageof theStageIMasterPlanareawithintheSROZ
             but outside any BPA easements by the maximum density for the Zoning Designation as
             shown in Table 1 of Section 4.124.

      B.    Step2.ReducetheEMDobtainedinStep1by50percentandthenrounddowntothenearest
             whole number. This is the density (number of units) able to be transferred from the SROZ
             areatoelsewhereintheStageIMasterPlanareaprovidedapplicablestandardsforthezone
             arestillmetincluding,butnotlimitedto,alloweduses,setbacks,standardsforoutdoorliving
             area, landscaping, building height and parking.

(.03)  Alterationof constructeddrainageways. Alteration of constructed drainageways may be allowed
      providedthatsuchalterationsdonotadverselyimpactstreamflows,floodstoragecapacityandin
      streamwaterqualityandprovidemoreefficientuseof thelandaswellasprovideimprovedhabitat
      value through mitigation, enhancement and/or restoration. Such alterations must be evaluated
      through an SRIR and approved by the City Engineer and Development Review Board.
(Ord. No. 841, 6-4-2020)

Section  4.140. Planned Development Regulations.

(.01)  Purpose:

      A.     The provisions of Section 4.140 shall be known as the Planned Development Regulations.
             The purposes of  these regulations are to encourage the development of  tracts of  land
             sufficientlylargetoallowforcomprehensivemasterplanning,andtoprovideflexibilityinthe
             applicationof certainregulationsinamannerconsistentwiththeintentof theComprehen-
             sive Plan and general provisions of the zoning regulations and to encourage a harmonious
             varietyof usesthroughmixedusedesignwithinspecificdevelopmentstherebypromotingthe

                                                     CD4:302
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.140

             economy of shared public services and facilities and a variety of complimentary activities
             consistent with the land use designation on the Comprehensive Plan and the creation of an
             attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environment for living, shopping or working.

      B.      It is the further purpose of the following Section:

             1.      Totakeadvantageof advancesintechnology,architecturaldesign,andfunctionalland
                    use design;

             2.      To recognize the problems of population density, distribution and circulation and to
                    allowadeviationfromrigidestablishedpatternsof landuses,butcontrolledbydefined
                    policies and objectives detailed in the comprehensive plan;

             3.      To produce a comprehensive development equal to or better than that resulting from
                    traditional lot land use development.

             4.      Topermitflexibilityof designintheplacementandusesof buildingsandopenspaces,
                    circulationfacilitiesandoff-streetparkingareas,andtomoreefficientlyutilizepoten-
                    tialsof sitescharacterizedbyspecialfeaturesof geography,topography,sizeorshapeor
                    characterized by problems of flood hazard, severe soil limitations, or other hazards;

             5.      Topermitflexibilityintheheightof buildingswhilemaintainingaratioof siteareato
                    dwelling units that is consistent with the densities established by the Comprehensive
                    Planandtheintentof thePlantoprovideopenspace,outdoorlivingareaandbuffering
                    of low-density development.

             6.      To allow development only where necessary and adequate services and facilities are
                    available or provisions have been made to provide these services and facilities.

             7.      Topermitmixeduseswhereitcanclearlybedemonstratedtobeof benefittotheusers
                    and can be shown to be consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan.

             8.      To allow flexibility and innovation in adapting to changes in the economic and
                    technological climate.

(.02)  LotQualification:

      A.     Planned Development may be established on lots which are suitable for and of a size to be
             planned and developed in a manner consistent with the purposes and objectives of Section
             4.140.

      B.      Any site designated for development in the Comprehensive Plan may be developed as a
             PlannedDevelopment,providedthatitiszoned"PD"orspecificallydefinedasaPDzoneby
             this Code. All sites which are greater than two acres in size, and designated in the Compre-
             hensive Plan for commercial, residential, or industrial use shall be developed as Planned
             Developments,unlessapprovedforotherusespermittedbytheDevelopmentCode.Smaller
             sites may also be developed through the City's PD procedures, provided that the location,
             size, lot configuration, topography, open space and natural vegetation of the site warrant
             such development.

                                                       CD4:303
§ 4.140                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  Ownership:

      A.     Thetractortractsof landincludedinaproposedPlannedDevelopmentmustbeinone(1)
             ownership or control or the subject of a joint application by the owners of all the property
             included. The holder of a written option to purchase, with written authorization by the
             owner to make applications, shall be deemed the owner of such land for the purposes of
             Section 4.140.

      B.      Unlessotherwiseprovidedasaconditionforapprovalof aPlannedDevelopmentpermit,the
             permitteemaydivideandtransferunitsorparcelsof anydevelopment.Thetransfereeshall
             useandmaintaineachsuchunitorparcelinstrictconformancewiththeapprovalpermitand
             development plan.

(.04)  ProfessionalDesign:

      A.     The applicant for all proposed Planned Developments shall certify that the professional
             services of  the appropriate professionals have been utilized in the planning process for
             development.

      B.      Appropriate professionals shall include, but not be limited to the following to provide the
             elements of the planning process set out in Section 4.139:
             1.      An architect licensed by the State of Oregon;
             2.      A landscape architect registered by the State of Oregon;
             3.      An urban planner holding full membership in the American Institute of Certified
                    Planners,oraprofessionalplannerwithpriorexperiencerepresentingclientsbeforethe
                    Development Review Board, Planning Commission, or City Council; or
             4.      A registered engineer or a land surveyor licensed by the State of Oregon.

      C.     Oneof theprofessionalconsultantschosenbytheapplicantfromeither1,2,or3,above,shall
             be designated to be responsible for conferring with the planning staff with respect to the
             concept and details of the plan.

      D.     Theselectionof theprofessionalcoordinatorof thedesignteamwillnotlimittheowneror
             the developer in consulting with the planning staff.

(.05)  PlannedDevelopmentPermitProcess:

      A.     Allparcelsof landexceedingtwoacresinsizethataretobeusedforresidential,commercial
             or industrial development, shall, prior to the issuance of any building permit:

             1.      Be zoned for planned development;
             2.      Obtain a planned development permit; and
             3.      Obtain Planning Director, Development Review Board, or, on appeal, City Council
                    approval.

      B.      Zonechangeandamendmenttothezoningmaparegovernedbytheapplicableprovisionsof
             the Zoning Sections, inclusive of Section 4.197.

                                                       CD4:304
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.140

      C.     DevelopmentReviewBoardandPlanningDirectorapprovalisgovernedbySections4.400to
             4.450.

      D.     Allplanneddevelopmentsrequireaplanneddevelopmentpermit.Theplanneddevelopment
             permitreviewandapprovalprocessconsistsof thefollowingmultiplestages,thelasttwoor
             three of which can be combined at the request of the applicant:

             1.      Pre-application conference with Planning Department;

             2.      Preliminary (Stage I) review by the Development Review Board or the Planning
                   Director for properties within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.
                   When a zone change is necessary, application for such change shall be made simulta-
                   neously with an application for preliminary approval; and

             3.      Final(StageII)reviewbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardorthePlanningDirectorfor
                   properties within the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District.

             4.      Inthecaseof azonechangeandzoneboundaryamendment,CityCouncilapprovalis
                   requiredtoauthorizeaStageIpreliminaryplanexceptforpropertieswithintheCoffee
                   CreekIndustrialDesignOverlayDistrict,whichmayreceiveseparatezonemapamend-
                   ment approvals.

(.06)  Staff Report:

      A.     Theplanningstaff shallprepareareportof itsfindingsandconclusionsastowhethertheuse
             contemplatedisconsistentwiththelandusedesignatedontheComprehensivePlan.If there
             isadisagreementastowhethertheusecontemplatedisconsistent,theapplicant,byrequest,
             or the staff, may take the preliminary information provided to the Development Review
             Board for a use interpretation.

      B.      TheapplicantmayproceedtoapplyforStageI—PreliminaryApproval-upondetermination
             byeitherstaff ortheDevelopmentReviewBoardthattheusecontemplatedisconsistentwith
             the Comprehensive Plan.

(.07)  PreliminaryApproval(StageOne):

      A.     Applications for preliminary approval for planned developments shall:

             1.      Be made by the owner of all affected property or the owner's authorized agent; and

             2.      Be filed on a form prescribed by the City Planning Department and filed with said
                   Department.

             3.      Set forth the professional coordinator and professional design team as provided in
                   subsection (.04), above.

             4.      Statewhetherthedevelopmentwillincludemixedlanduses,andif so,whatusesandin
                   what proportions and locations.

                                                     CD4:305
§ 4.140                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      B.      The application shall include conceptual and quantitatively accurate representations of the
             entiredevelopmentsufficienttojudgethescope,size,andimpactof thedevelopmentonthe
             community;and,inadditiontotherequirementssetforthinSection4.035,shallbeaccom-
             panied by the following information:
             1.      A boundary survey or a certified boundary description by a registered engineer or
                    licensed surveyor.
             2.      Topographic information as set forth in Section 4.035.
             3.      A tabulation of the land area to be devoted to various uses, and a calculation of the
                    averageresidentialdensitypernetacre.DevelopmentswithintheRNzoneshallshow
                    how the proposed number of units complies with the applicable maximum and mini-
                    mum provisions of the RN zone.

             4.      A stage development schedule demonstrating that the developer intends receive Stage
                    IIapprovalwithintwoyearsof receivingStageIapproval,andtocommenceconstruc-
                    tionwithintwoyearsaftertheapprovalof thefinaldevelopmentplan,andwillproceed
                    diligentlytocompletion;unlessaphaseddevelopmentschedulehasbeenapproved;in
                    whichcaseadherencetothatscheduleshallbeconsideredtoconstitutediligentpursuit
                    of project completion.
             5.      A commitment by the applicant to provide in the Final Approval (Stage II) a perfor-
                    mancebondorotheracceptablesecurityforthecapitalimprovementsrequiredbythe
                    project.

             6.      If it is proposed that the final development plan will be executed in stages, a schedule
                    thereof shall be provided.
             7.      Statement of anticipated waivers from any of the applicable site development stan-
                    dards.

      C.     AnapplicationforaStageIapprovalshallbeconsideredbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard
             as follows:
             1.      A public hearing as provided in Section 4.013.

             2.      After such hearing, the Board shall determine whether the proposal conforms to the
                    permit criteria set forth in this Code, and may approve or disapprove the application
                    and the accompanying preliminary development plan or require such changes therein
                    or impose such conditions of approval as are in its judgment, necessary to ensure
                    conformitytosaidcriteriaandregulations.Insodoing,theBoardmay,initsdiscretion,
                    authorizesubmissionof thefinaldevelopmentplaninstages,correspondingtodiffer-
                    ent units or elements of the development. It shall do so only upon evidence assuring
                    completionof theentiredevelopmentinaccordancewiththepreliminarydevelopment
                    plan and stage development schedule.

             3.      A final decision on a complete application and preliminary plan shall be rendered
                    within120daysaftertheapplicationisdeemedcompleteunlessacontinuanceisagreed
                    upon by the applicant and the appropriate City decision-making body.

                                                       CD4:306
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.140

              4.      The determination of the Development Review Board shall become final at the end of
                     the appeal period for the decision, unless appealed to the City Council in accordance
                     with Section 4.022 of this Code.

       D.     As provided in Section 4.134, an application for a Stage I approval within the Coffee Creek
              Industrial Design Overlay District may be considered by the Planning Director as follows:

              1.      A Class II—Administrative Review as provided in Section 4.035(.03).
              2.      After considering available information, the Planning Director shall determine whether
                     the proposal conforms to the permit criteria set forth in this Code and may approve or
                     disapprove the application and the accompanying preliminary development plan or
                     require such changes therein or impose such conditions of approval as are in his or her
                     judgment, necessary to ensure conformity to said criteria and regulations. In so doing,
                     the Planning Director may, in his or her discretion, authorize submission of the final
                     development plan in stages, corresponding to different units or elements of the devel-
                     opment. The Planning Director shall do so only upon receiving evidence assuring
                     completion of the entire development in accordance with the preliminary development
                     plan and stage development schedule.

              3.      A final decision on a complete application and preliminary plan shall be rendered
                     within 12 days after the application is deemed complete unless a continuance is agreed
                     upon by the applicant and the Planning Director.
              4.      The determination of the Planning Director shall become final at the end of the appeal
                     period for the decision, unless appealed to the Development Review Board in accor-
                     dance with Section 4.022 of this Code.

(.09)  Final Approval (Stage Two):

       A.     Unless an extension has been granted by the Planning Director, within two years after the
              approval or modified approval of a preliminary development plan (Stage I), the applicant
              shall file with the City Planning Department a final plan for the entire development or when
              submission in stages has been authorized pursuant to Section 4.035 for the first unit of the
              development, a public hearing shall be held on each such application as provided in Section
              4.013. As provided in Section 4.134, an application for a Stage II approval within the Coffee
              Creek Industrial Design Overlay District may be considered by the Planning Director
              without a public hearing as a Class II Administrative Review as provided in Section
              4.035(.03).

       B.      The Development Review Board or Planning Director, as applicable, shall determine whether
              the proposal conforms to the permit criteria set forth in this Code, and shall approve,
              conditionally approve, or disapprove the application.

       C.     The final plan shall conform in all major respects with the approved preliminary develop-
              ment plan, and shall include all information included in the preliminary plan plus the
              following:

              1.      The location of water, sewerage and drainage facilities;

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:307
§ 4.140                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Preliminary building and landscaping plans and elevations, sufficient to indicate the
                     general character of the development;
              3.      The general type and location of signs;
              4.      Topographic information as set forth in Section 4.035;
              5.      A map indicating the types and locations of all proposed uses; and
              6.      A grading plan.

       D.     The final plan shall be sufficiently detailed to indicate fully the ultimate operation and
              appearance of the development or phase of development. However, Site Design Review is a
              separate and more detailed review of proposed design features, subject to the standards of
              Section 4.400.

       E.     Copies of legal documents required by the Development Review Board or Planning Director,
              as applicable, for dedication or reservation of  public facilities, or for the creation of  a
              non-profit homeowner's association, shall also be submitted.
       F.      Within 30 days after the filing of the final development plan, the Planning staff shall forward
              such development plan and the original application to the Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue
              District, if  applicable, and other agencies involved for review of  public improvements,
              including streets, sewers and drainage. The Development Review Board or Planning Direc-
              tor, as applicable, shall not act on a final development plan until it has first received a report
              from the agencies or until more than 30 days have elapsed since the plan and application were
              sent to the agencies, whichever is the shorter period.
       G.     Upon receipt of the final development plan, the Development Review Board or Planning
              Director, as applicable shall examine such plan and determine:
              1.      Whether it conforms to all applicable criteria and standards; and
              2.      Whether it conforms in all substantial respects to the preliminary approval; or
              3.      Require such changes in the proposed development or impose such conditions of
                     approval as are in its judgment necessary to insure conformity to the applicable criteria
                     and standards.

       H.     If the Development Review Board or Planning Director, as applicable, permits the applicant
              to revise the plan, it shall be resubmitted as a final development plan within 60 days. If the
              Board or Planning Director approves, disapproves or grants such permission to resubmit, the
              decision of the Board shall become final at the end of the appeal period for the decision,
              unless appealed to the City Council, in accordance with Sections 4.022 of this Code.
       I.      All Stage II Site Development plan approvals shall expire two years after their approval date,
              if substantial development has not occurred on the property prior to that time. Provided,
              however, that the Planning Director may extend these expiration times for up to three
              additional periods of not more than one year each. Applicants seeking time extensions shall
              make their requests in writing at least one days in advance of  the expiration date. A
              development approval shall not expire prior to a decision on the granting of  this time
              extension if the request was submitted in accordance with this subsection. Requests for time

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:308
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.140

              extensions shall only be granted upon (1) a showing that the applicant has in good faith
              attempted to develop or market the property in the preceding year or that development can
              be expected to occur within the next year, and (2) payment of any and all Supplemental Street
              SDCs applicable to the development. Upon such payment, the development shall have vested
              traffic generation rights under [section] 4.140(.10), provided however, that if the Stage II
              approval should expire, the vested right to use trips is terminated upon City repayment,
              without interest, of Supplemental Street SDCs. For purposes of this Ordinance, "substantial
              development" is deemed to have occurred if the required building permits or public works
              permits have been issued for the development, and the development has been diligently
              pursued, including the completion of all conditions of approval established for the permit.

       J.       A planned development permit may be granted by the Development Review Board or
              Planning Director, as applicable, only if it is found that the development conforms to all the
              following criteria, as well as to the Planned Development Regulations in Section 4.140:

              1.      The location, design, size and uses, both separately and as a whole, are consistent with
                     the Comprehensive Plan, and with any other applicable plan, development map or
                     Ordinance adopted by the City Council.

              2.      That the location, design, size and uses are such that traffic generated by the develop-
                     ment at the most probable used intersection(s) can be accommodated safely and
                     without congestion in excess of Level of Service D, as defined in the Highway Capacity
                     Manual published by the National Highway Research Board, on existing or immedi-
                     ately planned arterial or collector streets and will, in the case of  commercial or
                     industrial developments, avoid traversing local streets. Immediately planned arterial
                     and collector streets are those listed in the City's adopted Capital Improvement
                     Program, for which funding has been approved or committed, and that are scheduled
                     for completion within two years of occupancy of the development or four year if they
                     are an associated crossing, interchange, or approach street improvement to Interstate 5.
                     a.      In determining levels of Service D, the City shall hire a traffic engineer at the
                            applicant's expense who shall prepare a written report containing the following
                            minimum information for consideration by the Development Review Board:
                            i.       An estimate of the amount of traffic generated by the proposed develop-
                                   ment, the likely routes of travel of the estimated generated traffic, and the
                                   source(s) of information of the estimate of the traffic generated and the
                                   likely routes of travel;
                            ii.      What impact the estimate generated traffic will have on existing level of
                                   service including traffic generated by (1) the development itself, (2) all
                                   existing developments, (3) Stage II developments approved but not yet
                                   built, and (4) all developments that have vested traffic generation rights
                                   under section 4.140(.10), through the most probable used intersection(s),
                                   including state and county intersections, at the time of peak level of traffic.
                                   This analysis shall be conducted for each direction of travel if backup from
                                   other intersections will interfere with intersection operations.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:309
§ 4.140                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     b.      The following are exempt from meeting the Level of Service D criteria standard:
                            i.       A planned development or expansion thereof which generates three new
                                   p.m. peak hour traffic trips or less;
                            ii.      A planned development or expansion thereof which provides an essential
                                   governmental service.
                     c.      Traffic generated by development exempted under this subsection on or after
                            Ordinance No. 463 was enacted shall not be counted in determining levels of
                            service for any future applicant.
                     d.      Exemptions under 'b' of this subsection shall not exempt the development or
                            expansion from payment of  system development charges or other applicable
                            regulations.
                     e.      In no case will development be permitted that creates an aggregate level of traffic
                            at LOS "F".
              3.      That the location, design, size and uses are such that the residents or establishments to
                     be accommodated will be adequately served by existing or immediately planned
                     facilities and services.
       K.     Mapping: Whenever a Planned Development permit has been granted, and so long as the
              permit is in effect, the boundary of the Planned Development shall be indicated on the
              Zoning Map of the City of Wilsonville as the appropriate "PD" Zone.
(.10)  Adherence to Approved Plans, Modification.
       A.     Adherence to Approved Plan and Modification Thereof: The applicant shall agree in writing
              to be bound, for her/himself and her/his successors in interest, by the conditions prescribed
              for approval of a development. The approved final plan and stage development schedule shall
              control the issuance of all building permits and shall restrict the nature, location and design
              of all uses. Minor changes in an approved preliminary or final development plan may be
              approved by the Director of Planning if such changes are consistent with the purposes and
              general character of the development plan. All other modifications, including extension or
              revision of the stage development schedule, shall be processed in the same manner as the
              original application and shall be subject to the same procedural requirements.
       B.      In the event of a failure to comply with the approved plan or any prescribed condition of
              approval, including failure to comply with the stage development schedule, the Development
              Review Board may, after notice and hearing, revoke a Planned Development permit. General
              economic conditions that affect all in a similar manner may be considered as a basis for an
              extension of a development schedule. The determination of the Board shall become final 30
              days after the date of decision unless appealed to the City Council.
       C.     Approved plans and non-conforming status with updated zoning and development stan-
              dards.
              1.      Approved plans are the basis of legal conforming status of development except where
                     one of  the following occurs, at which point, the approved planned development
                     becomes legally non-conforming:
                     a.      the zoning of land within the plan area has been changed since adoption of the
                            plan; or

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:310
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.140

                     b.      the zoning standards for the zone under which it was approved have been
                            substantially modified (50 percent or more of the regulatory standards have been
                            modified as determined by the Planning Director); or
                     c.      the City Council declared all planned developments in a certain zone or zones to
                            be legal non-conforming as part of an ordinance to update or replace zoning
                            standards; or
                     d.      the City Council declared, by a stand-alone ordinance, planned developments in
                            a certain zone not complying with current standards to be legal non-conforming.
                            The City Council may, in an ordinance establishing non-conforming status of a
                            planned  development,  declare  the  entire  planned  development  to  be  non-
                            conforming or declare certain standards established in the planned development
                            to be non-conforming (i.e., lot coverage, setbacks, stormwater standards).

              2.      If one of the conditions of subsection 1. is met, development that is consistent with the
                     approved plan, but not complying with current zoning standards, shall be considered
                     legal non-conforming and subject to the standards of Sections 4.189 thru 4.192.
              3.      In no case shall a planned development approved within the previous 24 months, or
                     under a time-extension under WC Section 4.023, be considered non-conforming; but
                     automatically will become non-conforming after 24-months, and the end of  any
                     extensions, if it otherwise would qualify as legally non-conforming or is so declared
                     pursuant to this subsection.

       D.     The following are exempt from established residential density requirements beyond one unit
              per lot.

              1.      Accessory Dwelling Units.

              2.      Duplexes.

              3.      Triplexes.

              4.      Quadplexes.

              5.      Cluster housing.

       E.     For new townhouses in existing residential planned developments in residential zones, the
              allowed density shall be the lesser of: (1) Four times the maximum net density for the lot(s) or
              parcel(s) established in the approved plan, or (2) 25 units per acre.

       F.      Notwithstanding Subsection C. above, single-family residential development built consistent
              with an approved master plan in the Planned Development Commercial or Planned Devel-
              opment Industrial zones prior to November 18, 2021 shall continue to be legal conforming
              uses. However, all lots within these master plans that allow for detached single-family must
              also allow all middle housing types with density exemptions and allowances consistent with
              D. and E. above. In addition, any lot coverage maximums established in the master plans less
              than those listed in Table 2 of Subsection 4.124(.07) are superseded by lot coverage standards
              in that table.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:311
§ 4.140                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.11)  Early Vesting of Traffic Generation. Applicants with Stage I or Master Plan approvals occurring
       after June 2, 2003 may apply to vest the right to use available transportation capacity at the
       intersections of Wilsonville Road with Boone's Ferry Road and with Town Center Loop West,
       and/or the I-5 interchange. Vesting for properties with such approvals shall occur upon execution
       of a vesting agreement satisfactory to the City, which agreement shall include a proposed devel-
       opment schedule or phasing plan and either provide for the payment of any and all Supplemental
       Street SDCs or provide other means of financing public improvements. Vesting for properties
       pending such approvals shall occur upon such agreement and the date the approvals are final.
       The number of  trips vested is subject to modification based upon updated traffic analysis
       associated with subsequent development approvals for the property. A reduction in vested trips
       shall attend repayment of vesting fees by the City. An increase in available vested trips shall occur
       upon payment of necessary vesting fees.
       Vesting shall remain valid and run with the property, unless an approval that is necessary for vesting
       to occur is terminated or a vesting agreement is terminated. If the vested right to use certain trips
       is lost or terminated, as determined by the Community Development Director with the concur-
       rence of  City Council, such trips shall be made available to other development upon City
       repayment, without interest, of associated vesting fees.
(Ord. No. 561, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.141.  Special Regulations—Changes of Use.

(.01)  Except as otherwise specified in this Code, an approved land-use or existing non-conforming use
       may be changed to another use, subject to the standards of this Section.
       A.     Conversion to a use that is listed as permitted outright in the zone shall be permitted without
              discretionary review, provided that the existing use was not specifically approved through a
              Planned Development review process. If the existing use is a non-conforming use, is within a
              non-conforming structure, or is non-conforming as to site conditions, the conversion shall be
              subject to the applicable standards and procedures of Sections 4.189 through 4.191.
       B.      Conversion to a use that is listed as typically permitted in the zone, where the existing use was
              approved through a Planned Development review process, or conversion to a use that is
              found by the Planning Director to be substantially similar to a typically permitted use, shall
              be approved by the Planning Director, unless the Director determines that the proposed use
              will result in adverse impacts on neighboring properties that exceed those that would
              typically be permitted in the zone, in which case the Director shall require that the request be
              reviewed through the Class II Administrative Review process specified in Section 4.035.
       C.     Conversion to a use that is listed as conditional in the zone, or conversion to a use that is
              found by the Planning Director to be substantially similar to a listed conditional use, may be
              approved through the Conditional Use Permit process specified in Section 4.184. In review-
              ing the proposed Conditional Use Permit, the Development Review Board may approve the
              application only if the Board agrees with the Director's determination that the proposed use
              is substantially similar to one or more of the listed conditional uses of the zone.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:312
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.154

       D.     If a change of use is proposed in a situation where "A" through "C," above, do not apply, the
              use may be changed only after the site has been zoned in conformance with the Comprehen-
              sive Plan and the applicant completes the PD approval or other development permit process
              specified in this Code.

(.02)  The conversion of apartments or other rental units to condominiums shall be subject to the
       standards and procedures for land divisions specified in Section 4.200, et seq.

(.03)  The conversion of  any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of  a dwelling so as to
       accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a
       zone in which a new building of similar occupancy would be permitted under this Code, and only
       when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction and
       use in such zone.

                                   GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS

Section  4.154.  On-site Pedestrian Access and Circulation.

(.01)  On-site Pedestrian Access and Circulation:

       A.     The purpose of this section is to implement the pedestrian access and connectivity policies of
              the Transportation System Plan. It is intended to provide for safe, reasonably direct, and
              convenient pedestrian access and circulation.

       B.      Standards. Development shall conform to all of the following standards:

              1.      Continuous Pathway System. A pedestrian pathway system shall extend throughout the
                     development site and connect to adjacent sidewalks, and to all future phases of the
                     development, as applicable.

              2.      Safe, Direct, and Convenient. Pathways within developments shall provide safe, reason-
                     ably direct, and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all
                     adjacent parking areas, recreational areas/playgrounds, and public rights-of-way and
                     crosswalks based on all of the following criteria:
                     a.      Pedestrian pathways are designed primarily for pedestrian safety and conve-
                            nience, meaning they are free from hazards and provide a reasonably smooth and
                            consistent surface.
                     b.      The pathway is reasonably direct. A pathway is reasonably direct when it follows
                            a route between destinations that does not involve a significant amount of
                            unnecessary out-of-direction travel.
                     c.      The pathway connects to all primary building entrances and is consistent with the
                            Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
                     d.      All parking lots larger than three acres in size shall provide an internal bicycle and
                            pedestrian pathway pursuant to Section 4.155(.03)B.3.d.

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:313
§ 4.154                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              3.      Vehicle/Pathway Separation. Except as required for crosswalks, per subsection 4, below,
                     where a pathway abuts a driveway or street it shall be vertically or horizontally
                     separated from the vehicular lane. For example, a pathway may be vertically raised six
                     inches above the abutting travel lane, or horizontally separated by a row of bollards.
              4.      Crosswalks. Where a pathway crosses a parking area or driveway, it shall be clearly
                     marked with contrasting paint or paving materials (e.g., pavers, light-color concrete
                     inlay between asphalt, or similar contrast).
              5.      Pathway Width and Surface. Primary pathways shall be constructed of  concrete,
                     asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface, and not less than five feet wide.
                     Secondary pathways and pedestrian trails may have an alternative surface except as
                     otherwise required by the ADA.
              6.      All pathways shall be clearly marked with appropriate standard signs.
(Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013)

Section  4.155.  General Regulations—Parking, Loading and Bicycle Parking.

(.01)  Purpose:
       A.     The design of parking areas is intended to enhance the use of the parking area as it relates to
              the site development as a whole, while providing efficient parking, vehicle circulation and
              attractive, safe pedestrian access.
       B.      As much as possible, site design of impervious surface parking and loading areas shall
              address the environmental impacts of air and water pollution, as well as climate change from
              heat islands.
       C.     The view from the public right-of-way and adjoining properties is critical to meet the
              aesthetic concerns of the community and to ensure that private property rights are met.
              Where developments are located in key locations such as near or adjacent to the I-5
              interchanges, or involve large expanses of asphalt, they deserve community concern and
              attention.

(.02)  General Provisions:
       A.     When off-street parking is provided, the provision and maintenance of the off-street parking
              spaces is a continuing obligation of the property owner. The standards set forth herein shall
              be considered by the Development Review Board as minimum criteria.
       B.      No area shall be considered a parking space unless it can be shown that the area is accessible
              and usable for that purpose, and has maneuvering area for the vehicles, as determined by the
              Planning Director.

       C.     When calculating vehicle parking maximums or bicycle parking requirements in Table 5 for
              a development with multiple uses, the requirement shall be the sum of the requirements of the
              several uses computed separately.
       D.     To minimize land dedicated to parking, owners of two or more uses, structures, or lots may
              and are encouraged to utilize jointly the same parking area..

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:314
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.155

       E.     The conducting of any business activity shall not be permitted in parking areas, unless a
              temporary use permit is approved pursuant to Section 4.163.

       F.      Redevelopment of existing parking areas to other uses is allowed. Redevelopment is encour-
              aged. When reviewing redevelopment of existing parking areas, the Planning Director or
              Development Review Board shall not deny an application based on the subject area's
              previous designation to meet minimum vehicle parking requirements, or that a use previously
              approved subject to minimum parking requirements would fall below those previously
              applied minimum parking requirements with the redevelopment.

       G.     Where the boundary of a parking lot adjoins or is within a residential district, such parking
              lot shall be screened by a sight-obscuring fence or planting. The screening shall be continuous
              along that boundary and shall be at least six feet in height.

       H.     Parking spaces along the boundaries of a parking lot over 650 square feet in area, excluding
              access areas, shall be provided with a sturdy bumper guard or curb at least six inches high and
              located far enough within the boundary to prevent any portion of a car within the lot from
              extending over the property line or interfering with required screening or sidewalks.

       I.      All areas used for parking and maneuvering of cars shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete,
              or other surface, such as pervious materials (i. e. pavers, concrete, asphalt) that is found by the
              City's authorized representative to be suitable for the purpose. In all cases, suitable drainage,
              meeting standards set by the City's authorized representative shall be provided.

       J.       Artificial lighting which may be provided shall be so limited or deflected as not to shine into
              adjoining structures or into the eyes of passers-by.

       K.     Up to 40 percent of the off-street spaces may be compact car spaces as identified in Section
              4.001 - "Definitions" shall be appropriately identified.

       L.     Where off-street parking areas are designed for motor vehicles to overhang beyond curbs,
              planting areas adjacent to said curbs shall be increased to a minimum of seven feet in depth.
              This standard shall apply to a double row of parking, the net effect of which shall be to create
              a planted area that is a minimum of seven feet in depth.

       M.    Parklets are permitted within the TC Zone on up to two parking spaces per block and shall
              be placed in front of the business. Placement of parklet requires a temporary right-of-way use
              permit and approval by the City Engineer.

       N.     Residential garages shall meet all of the following criteria:

              1.      The garage contains an area, clear of any obstructions, equal to a standard size parking
                     space (nine feet by 18 feet) for each parking space within the garage;

              2.      Nine square feet is provided either in the garage or in a screened area of the lot per
                     container provided by the franchise hauler (solid waste, recycling, yard debris, etc.) to
                     ensure they are not placed in the parking spaces unless garbage and recycling is
                     provided in an approved enclosure approved pursuant to Wilsonville Development
                     Code;

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:315
§ 4.155                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       N.     Public sidewalks, public sidewalk easements or other public non-vehicle pedestrian easement
              areas shall not be counted towards the area of parking spaces or used for parking.

       O.     Shared visitor parking in certain residential areas:

              1.      In order to provide visitor parking in non-multi-family residential areas with limited
                     parking, lot size and/or required open space may be reduced equal to the area of
                     standard-sized parking spaces as described in 2. below if all the following criteria are
                     met:
                     a.      Ten percent or more of lots in the development do not have at least one adjacent
                            on-street parking space that is at least 22 feet long.
                     b.      Shared parking spaces are within 250 feet of a lot without an on-street parking
                            space.
                     c.      Shared parking spaces will be owned by an HOA and have enforceable covenants
                            in place to ensure spaces are managed for visitor parking and not storage of extra
                            vehicles or overflow parking of  residents. This may include time limits on
                            parking, limits on overnight parking, or other similar limits.
              2.      When shared visitor parking is provided that meets the standards of 1. above, lot size or
                     open space area for the development may be reduced as provided below. The same
                     visitor parking spaces cannot be used to reduce both lot size and open space area. To
                     achieve both reductions, adequate visitor parking space must be provided to offset both
                     lot size and open space area reductions.
                     a.      Individual lot size may be reduced by up to 2.5 percent of the minimum lot size for
                            the zone to allow an equal area to be developed as shared parking, as long as the
                            shared parking space is within 250 feet of the reduced lot.
                     b.      Open space required under Subsection 4.113(.01) may be reduced by up to 2.5
                            percent of  gross development area (from 25 percent down to as low as 22.5
                            percent) to allow an area equal to the reduced open space as shared parking. No
                            more than 50 percent of the reduced open space area may be from the required
                            usable open space. In the RN zone, the ten percent Open Space requirement for
                            Small-Lot Subdistrict may be reduced to eight percent.
                     c.      In order to reduce stormwater runoff and the need for stormwater facilities,
                            shared visitor parking areas are encouraged to be constructed of  pervious
                            surfaces.

(.03)  Off-Street Parking Requirements:

       A.     Parking and loading or delivery areas shall be designed with access and maneuvering area
              adequate to serve the functional needs of the site and shall:

              1.      Separate loading and delivery areas and circulation from customer and/or employee
                     parking and pedestrian areas. Circulation patterns shall be clearly marked.

              2.      To the greatest extent possible, separate vehicle and pedestrian traffic.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:316
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.155

       B.      Parking areas over 650 square feet, excluding access areas, and loading or delivery areas shall
              be landscaped to minimize the visual dominance of the parking or loading area, as follows:

              1.      General Landscaping Requirements:
                     •        At least 10% of each parking area shall be landscaped to ensure it is screened from
                             view from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
                     •        This landscaping shall count towards the 15 percent total landscaping required in
                             Section 4.176.03 for the site development.

              2.      Tree Planting Requirements:
                     a.      Ratios:
                             •        For parking areas with fewer than 40 spaces, one tree shall be planted for
                                    every eight parking spaces.
                             •        For parking areas with 40 or more spaces, one tree shall be planted for every
                                    six parking spaces, except as reduced under the Solar Panel Installation
                                    Option described in d. below.
                     b.      Calculation:
                             •        When calculating the required number of trees based on the ratios in a., any
                                    non-whole number shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
                     c.      Landscape Tree Planting Areas:
                             i.       Each landscape tree planting area shall have a minimum dimension of eight
                                    feet in both width and length, or provide an equivalent soil volume within
                                    the top 36 inches.
                                    1.      Root barriers must be installed for any hard surfaces located within
                                           eight feet of the center of the tree trunk.
                             ii.      Planting areas shall be evenly spaced throughout the planting area (e.g.,
                                    every 6 or 8 parking spaces depending on the ratio in a.). Planting areas are
                                    considered spaced evenly when:
                                    •        90 percent of parking spaces are within five parking spaces of a tree;
                                           and
                                    •        the parking area has one 64 square-foot or greater planting area for
                                           every 6 or 8 parking spaces, depending on the ratio in a.
                     d.      Solar Panel Installation Option:
                             •        For parking areas with 40 spaces or more, a developer may choose to
                                    exempt up to 25 percent of the parking spaces from the calculation of the
                                    ratio in a. by installing a prescribed amount of  on-site solar panels as
                                    follows:
                                    i.       For each 0.5 kilowatt of generation capacity of on-site solar panels,
                                           one parking space may be exempted from the calculation of the ratio
                                           in a.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:317
§ 4.155                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     e.      Tree Planting Location and Shading Requirements:
                            i.       Required trees may be planted within the parking area or the perimeter,
                                    provided that a minimum percentage of the canopy dripline of mature
                                    perimeter trees can be expected to shade or overlap the parking area, as
                                    follows:
                                    •        For parking areas with less than 40 spaces, 30 percent.
                                    •        For parking areas with 40 spaces or more not utilizing the Solar Panel
                                           Installation Option in d. above, 40 percent.
                                    •        For parking areas with 40 spaces utilizing the Solar Panel Installation
                                           Option in d. above, 40 percent minus 0.4 percent for each percent of
                                           parking spaces exempted from the tree-to-parking-space ratio due to
                                           solar panel installation (e.g., if  a 150-space parking area has 15
                                           parking spaces exempted, which is 10 percent of the parking spaces,
                                           the shading requirement percentage would be 36 percent).
                     f.       Clearance for Parking Trees:
                            •        Except for trees planted for screening, all deciduous interior parking area
                                    trees must be suitably sized, located, and maintained to provide a branching
                                    minimum of seven feet clearance at maturity.
                     g.      Stormwater Integration:
                            •        While integration of stormwater facilities into the parking area landscaping
                                    is encouraged, required parking lot trees shall not be placed in stormwater
                                    facilities designed for future soil media replacement.

              3.      Coordination of Landscaping with Sign Plans:
                     •        Where view of signs is pertinent to landscape design, any approved or planned
                            sign plan shall accompany the application for landscape design approval.

              4.      Additional Design Standards for Large Parking Areas:

                     •        Due to their large amount of impervious surface, new development with parking
                            areas of more than 200 spaces that are located in any zone, and that may be
                            viewed from the public right-of-way, shall meet the following additional stan-
                            dards:
                            a.      Internal Pedestrian Walkways:
                                    •        Parking lots shall provide an internal pedestrian walkway for every six
                                           parking aisles.
                                    •        Minimum walkway clearance shall be at least five feet in width.
                                    •        Walkways shall be designed to provide pedestrian access to parking
                                           areas in order to minimize pedestrian travel among vehicles.
                                    •        Walkways shall be designed to channel pedestrians to the main en-
                                           trance of the building.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:318
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.155

                            b.      Street-like Features Along Drive Aisles:
                                   •        Parking lots more than three acres in size shall provide street-like
                                           features along principal drive aisles, including curbs, sidewalks, street
                                           trees or planting strips, and bicycle routes.
                            c.      Increased Landscape Buffer:
                                   •        All parking lots viewed from the public right-of-way shall have a
                                           minimum 12 foot landscaped buffer extending from the edge of the
                                           property line at the right-of-way to the edge of the parking area.
                                   •        Buffer landscaping shall meet the low screen standard of 4.176(.02)D
                                           except that trees, groundcovers and shrubs shall be grouped to pro-
                                           vide visual interest and to create view openings no more than ten feet
                                           in length and provided every 40 feet.
                                   •        Notwithstanding  this  requirement,  view  of  parking  area  that  is
                                           unscreened from the right-of-way due to slope or topography shall
                                           require an increased landscaping standard under 4.176(.02) in order
                                           to buffer and soften the view of vehicles as much as possible.
                                   •        For purposes of this section, "view from the public right-of-way" is
                                           intended to mean the view from the sidewalk directly across the street
                                           from the site, or if no sidewalk, from the opposite side of the adjacent
                                           street or road.
                            d.      Reserved.
                            e.      Tree Planting Location:
                                   •        At least 25 percent of the required trees shall be planted in the interior
                                           of the parking area.

       C.     Off-Street Parking shall be designed for safe and convenient access that meets ADA and
              ODOT standards. All parking areas which contain ten (10) or more parking spaces, shall for
              every 50 standard spaces., provide one ADA-accessible parking space that is constructed to
              building code standards, Wilsonville Code 9.000.

       D.     Where possible, parking areas shall be designed to connect with parking areas on adjacent
              sites so as to eliminate the necessity for any mode of travel of utilizing the public street for
              multiple accesses or cross movements. In addition, on-site parking shall be designed for
              efficient on-site circulation and parking.

       E.     In all multi-family dwelling developments, bicycle parking is required as indicated in section
              4.155(.04). Additionally, areas to provide for parking and storage of mopeds or motorcycles
              are encouraged. Such areas shall be clearly defined and reserved for the exclusive use of these
              vehicles.

       F.      Table 5 shall be used to determine the parking requirements and allowances for various land
              uses. The number of parking spaces related to the requirements and allowances shown on
              Table 5 shall be determined by rounding to the nearest whole parking space. Structured
              parking and on-street parking are exempted from the parking maximums in Table 5.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:319
§ 4.155                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       G.     Electrical Vehicle (EV) Charging Infrastructure Requirements:
              1.      Applicability:
                     •        The requirements apply equally whether Charging Stations are installed with the
                             initial development of the parking area or at a later date. As such, the require-
                             ments focus on readiness for, not installation of, Charging Stations.
                     •        The requirements apply to all new off-street parking areas for the multi-family
                             and non-residential land uses indicated in this section.
              2.      Residential and Mixed-Use Development:
                     •        For any residential or mixed-use development with five or more dwelling units on
                             a single lot, at least 40 percent of all off-street vehicle parking spaces must be EV
                             Ready, meeting the requirements in 4. below. No waivers, administrative relief, or
                             variance requests are permitted.
              3.      Other Uses:
                     •        Private commercial and industrial parking areas must comply with minimum EV
                             infrastructure standards set by the Building Code. EV infrastructure required by
                             the Building Code shall also meet the Standards in Subsections 4. c. and f. below.
              4.      EV Ready Requirements:
                     •        For a vehicle parking space to be considered EV Ready, and thus count towards
                             the minimum in 3. above and meeting the requirements of 3. above, the following
                             requirements shall be met:
                             a.      Designation of Charging Station Locations:
                                    •        A location is designated for a device or multi-component facility to
                                           deliver electricity to a vehicle parked in the space.
                             b.      Sizing of Electrical Service to Site:
                                    •        Electrical service to the site is sized for the cumulative number of
                                           Charging Stations and supporting electrical equipment.
                             c.      Space for On-site Electrical Equipment to Support Capacity:
                                    •        Space shall be designated within a building, or elsewhere at the site
                                           where screening standards in Section 4.176 can be met, for on-site
                                           electrical equipment, including overcurrent devices, with the capacity
                                           to serve the Charging Stations.
                             d.      Conduit:
                                    •        Conduit shall be installed between the Charging Stations Locations
                                           and supporting electrical service and equipment;
                                    •        Conduit shall support electrical wiring for a Level 2 EV Charging
                                           Station;
                                    •        Unless connected to Charging Stations during initial development,
                                           the conduit shall have labels on both ends to mark the conduit as
                                           provided for future Charging Stations.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:320
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.155

                            f.       Coordination of Charging Stations with Other Site Elements:
                                   •        The location of Charging Stations and supporting equipment shall be
                                           coordinated and placed to avoid conflicts with other site elements
                                           during site planning including landscaping, screening, stormwater
                                           facilities, and pedestrian facilities.
                     6.      Modification of existing parking spaces to accommodate EV Charging Stations
                            is allowed outright.
       H.     Reserved.
       I.      Motorcycle parking:
              1.      Motorcycle parking spaces must be at least four feet wide and eight feet deep. Existing
                     parking may be converted to take advantage of this provision.

(.04)  Bicycle Parking:
       A.     Required Bicycle Parking—General Provisions:
              1.      The required minimum number of bicycle parking spaces for each use category is
                     shown in Table 5, Parking Standards.
              2.      Bicycle parking spaces are not required for accessory buildings. If a primary use is listed
                     in Table 5, bicycle parking is not required for the accessory use.
              3.      When there are two or more primary uses on a site, the required bicycle parking for the
                     site is the sum of the required bicycle parking for the individual primary uses.
              4.      Bicycle parking space requirements may be waived by the Development Review Board
                     per Section 4.118(.03)A.9. and 10.
       B.      Standards for Required Bicycle Parking:
              1.      Each space must be at least two feet by six feet in area and be accessible without moving
                     another bicycle.
              2.      An aisle at least five feet wide shall be maintained behind all required bicycle parking to
                     allow room for bicycle maneuvering. Where the bicycle parking is adjacent to a
                     sidewalk, the maneuvering area may extend into the right-of-way.
              3.      When bicycle parking is provided in racks, there must be enough space between the rack
                     and any obstructions to use the space properly.
              4.      Bicycle lockers or racks, when provided, shall be securely anchored. Unless within a
                     lockable space only available to authorized users, racks shall allow ways to lock at least
                     two points on a bicycle.
              5.      Bicycle parking shall be located within 30 feet of the main entrance to the building or
                     inside a building, in a location that is well-lit and easily accessible for bicycles. For
                     multi-tenant developments, with multiple business entrances, bicycle parking may be
                     distributed on-site among more than one main entrance.
              6.      Bicycle parking areas shall include parking spaces to accommodate large bicycles,
                     including family and cargo bicycles.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:321
§ 4.155                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                7.      With Planning Director approval, on street vehicle parking can also be used for bicycle
                        parking.

        C.     Long-term Bicycle Parking:

                1.      Long-term bicycle parking provides employees, students, residents, commuters, and
                        others who generally stay at a site for several hours a weather-protected place to park
                        bicycles.

                2.      For a proposed multi-family residential, retail, office, or institutional development, or
                        for a park and ride or transit center, where six or more bicycle parking spaces are
                        required pursuant to Table 5, 50 percent of the bicycle parking shall be developed as
                        long-term, secure spaces. Required long-term bicycle parking shall meet the following
                        standards:
                        a.      All required spaces shall meet the standards in subsection (B.) above, and must be
                                covered in one of the following ways: inside buildings, under roof overhangs or
                                permanent awnings, in bicycle lockers, or within or under other structures.
                        b.      All spaces must be located in areas that are secure or monitored (e.g., visible to
                                employees, monitored by security guards, or in public view).
                        c.      Spaces are not subject to the locational criterion of [subsection] B.5.
                                Note: In considering proposed waivers to the following standards, the City will
                                consider the potential uses of  the site and not just the uses that are currently
                                proposed. For waivers to exceed the maximum standards, applicants shall bear the
                                burden of proving that Metro, State, and federal clean air standards will not be
                                violated.
                                      TABLE 5: PARKING STANDARDS

                            USE                                           PARKING MAXIMUMS                          BICYCLE MINIMUMS
                            a. Residential
                                 1.  Single-family dwelling        No Limit
                                   units, middle housing,
                                 2.  Accessory dwelling unit  No limit                                     None required
                                 3.  Multiple-family
                                   dwelling units                  1.2 spaces/studio unit and 2 spaces/non-studio unit             1 per D.U.
                                 4.  Manufactured or               No Limit                                   1 per D.U.
                                   mobile home park
                            b. Commercial Residential
                                 1.  Hotel                                No Limit                                   1 per 5 units
                                                                                                          Min. of 2
                                 2.  Motel                                No Limit                                   1 per 5 units
                                                                                                          Min. of 2
                                 3.  Clubs, Lodges                  No Limit                                   1 per 20 parking spaces
                                                                                                          Min. of 2
                            c. Institutions
                                 1.  Welfare or correctional
                                   institution                        No Limit                                   1 per 50 beds Min. of 2

Supp. No. 6                                                      CD4:322
                                           PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                                              § 4.155

                                TABLE 5: PARKING STANDARDS

                                USE                                           PARKING MAXIMUMS                          BICYCLE MINIMUMS
                                     2.  Convalescent hospital,            No Limit                                   1 per 6,000 sq. ft.
                                       nursing home, sanitar-                                                         Min. of 2
                                       ium, rest home, home
                                       for the aged
                                     3.  Hospital                           No Limit                                   1 per 20 parking spaces
                                                                                                                      Min. of 2
                                d. Places of Public Assembly
                                     1.  Church                             .8 per seat                                  1 per 50 seats
                                                                                                                      Min. of 2
                                     2.    Library, reading room,          No Limit                                   1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                       museum,                                                                        Min. of 6
                                       art gallery
                                     3.  Preschool nursery                 .3 per student and staff            1 per 3,500 sq. ft.
                                       , kindergarten                                                                 Min. of 2
                                     4.  Elementary or Middle
                                       School                              .3 per student and staff            8 per class (above 2 nd grade) K—2    nd grade: 1 per 3,500
                                                                                                                      sq. ft.
                                     5.  High School                     .3 per student and staff            4 per class
                                     6.  College, commercial
                                       school for adults              .3 per student and staff            1 per class Min. of 4
                                     7.  Other auditorium,
                                       meeting rooms                 .5 per seat                                  1 per 50 seats Min. of 4
                                     8.  Stadium, arena, theater  .5 per seat                                  1 per 40 seats
                                                                                                                      Min. of 4
                                     9.  Bowling alley                   No Limit                                   1 per 10 lanes
                                                                                                                      Min. of 2
                                  10.  Dance hall, skating                 6.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                   1 per 4,000 sq. ft.
                                       rink, gym, swim or                                                             Min. of 2
                                       fitness center
                                  11.  Tennis or racquetball
                                       facility                              1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                   1 per court Min. of 2
                                e. Commercial
                                     1.  Retail store except su-           5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                      1 per 4,000 sq. ft.
                                       permarkets and stores                                                          Min. of 2
                                       selling bulky merchan-
                                       dise and grocery stores
                                       1,500 sq. ft. gross floor
                                       area or less
                                     2.  Commercial retail,
                                       1,501 sq. ft. or more        5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                      1 per 4,000 sq. ft. Min. of 2
                                     3.  Automobile service,               6.2 per 1,000 sq. ft.                   1 per 4,000 sq. ft.
                                       dealerships or repair
                                       shops
                                     4.  Reserved
                                     5.  Office or flex space (ex-         4.1 per 1,000 sq. ft.                      1 per 5,000 sq. ft
                                       cept medical and den-                                                          Min. of 2
                                       tal)                                5 per 1,000 sq. ft.

                                       Bank with drive-thru
                                     6.  Medical and dental                5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                      1 per 5,000 sq. ft.
                                       office or clinic                                                               Min. of 2
                                       area

Supp. No. 6                                                              CD4:323
§ 4.155                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                             TABLE 5: PARKING STANDARDS

                             USE                                           PARKING MAXIMUMS                          BICYCLE MINIMUMS
                                  7.  Eating or drinking             23 per 1,000 sq. ft.                    1 per 4,000 sq. ft.
                                    establishments                    14.9 per 1,000 sq. ft.                 Min. of 4
                                     Fast food (with drive-

                                    thru)
                                    Other
                                  8.  Mortuaries                       No Limit                                   Min. of 2
                             f. Industrial
                                  1.  Manufacturing estab-
                                    lishment                           No Limit                                   1 per 10,000 sq. ft. Min. of 6
                                  2.  Storage warehouse,             .5 per 1,000 sq. ft.                     1 per 20,000 sq. ft.
                                    wholesale establish-                                                     Min. of 2
                                    ment, rail or trucking
                                    freight terminal
                             g.  Park & Ride or Transit
                                 Parking                                No Limit                                   5 per acre, minimum of 4, with 50% in lockable
                                                                                                             enclosures
                                 NOTES:
                                 1  For land uses with more than 65,000 square feet of floor area, surface parking
                                    may not consist of more area than the floor area of the building.
                                 2  Non-surface-level parking, such as tuck-under parking, underground and
                                    subsurface parking, and parking structures are exempt from maximum require-
                                    ments.

(.05)  Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements:

        A.     Every building that is erected or structurally altered to increase the floor area, and which will
                require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by truck or similar vehicle,
                shall provide off-street loading berths on the basis of minimum requirements as follows:
                1.      Commercial, industrial, and public utility uses which have a gross floor area of 5,000
                        square feet or more, shall provide truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with
                        the following tables:

                             Square feet of Floor Area                                         Number of Berths Required
                         Less than 5,000                                                                               0
                         5,000—30,000                                                                                   1
                         30,000—100,000                                                                               2
                         100,000 and over                                                                             3
                2.      Restaurants, office buildings, hotels, motels, hospitals and institutions, schools and
                        colleges, public buildings, recreation or entertainment facilities, and any similar use
                        which has a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet or more, shall provide off-street truck
                        loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following table:

                             Square feet of Floor Area                                         Number of Berths Required
                         Less than 30,000                                                                             0

Supp. No. 6                                                         CD4:324
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                          § 4.155

                      Square feet of Floor Area                                         Number of Berths Required
                      30,000—100,000                                                                               1
                      100,000 and over                                                                             2
              3.      A loading berth shall contain space 12 feet wide, 35 feet long, and have a height
                     clearance of 14 feet. Where the vehicles generally used for loading and unloading
                     exceed these dimensions, the required length of  these berths shall be increased to
                     accommodate the larger vehicles.
              4.      If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an
                     existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less
                     space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.
       B.      Exceptions and Adjustments:
              1.      The Planning Director or Development Review Board may approve a loading area
                     adjacent to or within a street right-of-way where it finds that loading and unloading
                     operations:
                     a.      Are short in duration (i.e., less than one hour);
                     b.      Are infrequent (less than three operations daily);
                     c.      Do not obstruct traffic during peak traffic hours;
                     d.      Do not interfere with emergency response services or bicycle and pedestrian
                             facilities; and
                     e.      Are acceptable to the applicable roadway authority.

(.06)  Carpool and Vanpool Parking Requirements:

       A.     Carpool and vanpool parking spaces shall be identified for the following uses:
              1.      Designated employee parking areas in all new developments with more than 50 parking
                     spaces,
              2.      New commercial and industrial developments with 75 or more parking spaces,
              3.      New institutional or public assembly uses, and
              4.      Transit park-and-ride facilities with 50 or more parking spaces.

       B.      Of the total spaces available for employee, student, and commuter parking, at least five
              percent, but not fewer than two, shall be designated for exclusive carpool and vanpool
              parking.

       C.     Carpool and vanpool parking spaces shall be located closer to the main employee, student or
              commuter entrance than all other parking spaces with the exception of ADA parking spaces.

       D.     Required carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly marked "Reserved - Carpool/Vanpool
              Only."
(Ord. No. 536, 1-7-2002; Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 548, 10-9-2002; Ord. No. 674 11-16-2009;
Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013; Ord. No. 825, 10-15-2018; Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A),
8-4-2025)

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:325
§ 4.156.01                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.156.01.  Sign Regulations Purpose and Objectives.

(.01)  Purpose. The general purpose of the sign regulations are to provide one of the principal means of
       implementing the Wilsonville Comprehensive Plan by fostering an aesthetically pleasing, func-
       tional, and economically vital community, as well as promoting public health, safety, and well-
       being. The sign regulations strive to accomplish the above general purpose by meeting the needs of
       sign owners while maintaining consistency with the development and design standards elsewhere in
       Chapter 4. This Code regulates the design, variety, number, size, location, and type of signs, as well
       as the processes required to permit various types of signs. Sign regulations have one or more of the
       following specific objectives:
       A.     Well-designed and aesthetically pleasing signs sufficiently visible and comprehensible from
              streets and rights-of-way that abut a site as to aid in wayfinding, identification and provide
              other needed information.
       B.      Sign design and placement that is compatible with and complementary to the overall design
              and architecture of a site, along with adjoining properties, surrounding areas, and the zoning
              district.
       C.     A consistent and streamlined sign review process that maintains the quality of sign develop-
              ment and ensures due process.
       D.     Consistent and equitable application and enforcement of sign regulations.
       E.     All signs are designed, constructed, installed, and maintained so that public safety, particu-
              larly traffic safety, are not compromised.
       F.      Sign regulations are content neutral.

Section  4.156.02.  Sign Review Process and General Requirements.

(.01)  Permit Required. Unless exempt under Section 4.156.05, no sign, permanent or temporary, shall be
       displayed or installed in the City without first obtaining a sign permit.

(.02)  Sign Permits and Master Sign Plans. Many properties in the City have signs pre-approved through
       a Master Sign Plan. For the majority of applications where a Master Sign Plan has been approved
       the applicant need not consult the sign requirements for the zone, but rather the Master Sign Plan,
       copies of which are available from the Planning Division. Signs conforming to a Master Sign Plan
       require only a Class I Sign Permit.

(.03)  Classes of Sign Permits, Master Sign Plans, and Review Process. The City has three classes of sign
       permits for permanent signs: Class I, Class II, and Class III. In addition, non-residential develop-

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:326
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.156.02

      ments with three or more tenants require a Master Sign Plan. Class I sign permits are reviewed
      throughtheClassIAdministrativeReviewProcessasoutlinedinSubsection4.030(.01)A.ClassII
      sign permits are reviewed through the Class II Administrative Review Process as outlined in
      Subsection 4.030 (.01)B. Class III Sign Permits and Master Sign Plans are reviewed by the
      Development Review Board (DRB) as outlined in Section 4.031.

(.04)  Class I Sign Permit. Sign permit requests shall be processed as a Class I Sign Permit when the
      requestedsignorsignsconformtoaMasterSignPlanorotherprevioussignapproval.Inaddition,
      a Minor Adjustment to a Master Sign Plan or other previous sign approval may be approved in
      connection with a Class I Sign Permit.
      A.    Class I Sign Permit Submission Requirements. Application for a Class I Sign Permit shall
             include two copies of the following along with all required application fees:
             1.      Completed application form prescribed by the City and signed by the property owner
                   or the property owner's representative,
             2.      Signdrawingsshowingallmaterials,thesignareaanddimensionsusedtocalculatesign
                   areas, and other details sufficient to judge the full scale of the associated sign or signs
                   and related improvements,
             3.      InformationshowinghowtheproposedsignorsignsconformwithallapplicableCode
                   requirements,MasterSignPlans,orotherprevioussignapprovalsfortheproperty,and
             4.      Information supporting any minor adjustment requests.
      B.    ClassISignPermitReviewCriteria.Thesignorsignsconformwiththeapplicablemastersign
             plan or other previous sign approvals, and applicable Code requirements.
      C.    Minor Adjustments. Notwithstanding approved Master Sign Plans or other previous sign
             approvals,aspartof aClassISignPermitMinorAdjustmentsmaybeapprovedasdescribed
             in1.and2.below.MinorAdjustmentsarevalidonlyfortheSignPermitwithwhichtheyare
             associated and do not carry over to future sign permits or copy changes.
             1.     AdjustmenttoSignHeightorLength. Adjustment of not more than ten percent from
                   thesignheight(notheightfromground)and/orlengthmaybeapprovedforthereasons
                   listedina.throughd.below,unlessotherwisespecificallyprohibitedintheMasterSign
                   Plan.Minoradjustmentstosignheightandlengthshallnotcausethesigntocrossthe
                   edgeof anyfascia,architecturalelementorareaof abuildingfacadeidentifiedasasign
                   band.Theareaof thesignexceedingtheheightorlengthaspartof aminoradjustment
                   shallnotcountagainstthesignareaindicatedinaMasterSignPlanorotherprevious
                   sign approval.
                   a.      To accommodate the descender on the lower case letters "q, y, p g, or j", not
                          otherwise accommodated by the measurement method used, where the letter
                          matchesthefontof otherlettersinthesign,thedescenderisnomorethan½the
                          cap height of the font, and the descender is no wider than the main body of the
                          letter;
                   b.      To accommodate stylized fonts where bowls, shoulders, or serifs of the stylized
                          letters extend beyond the cap height;

                                                     CD4:327
§ 4.156.02                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                    c.      To accommodate an arching or other non-straight baseline; or
                    d.      To accommodate a federally registered trademark logo where compliance with
                           thedefinedmaximumsignheightwouldresultinthecapheightof thetextinthe
                           logobeing90percentorlessof thecapheightforlettersotherwiseallowed.(i.e.if
                           a Master Sign Plan allowed 24" letters and 24" total sign height, and a 24" logo
                           wouldresultinthecapheightof thetextwithinthelogobeinglessthan21.6",the
                           total height of the logo could be increased to 26.4")

             2.     Lateral Adjustment of Building Sign Location. Lateral adjustment of a building sign
                    location identified in drawings or plans for a Master Sign Plan or other sign approval
                    when all of the following are met:
                    a.      Thelateraldistancebeingmoveddoesnotexceed50percentof thesignlengthor
                           ten feet, whichever is greater;
                    b.      Theexactlocationisnotspecificallysupportedorrequiredbywrittenfindingsor
                           a condition of approval;
                    c.      The sign remains within the same architectural feature and sign band, except if
                           thelocationisonapillar,column,orsimilarnarrowarchitecturalsupportfeature,
                           thesignmaybemovedtoasignbandonthearchitecturefeaturewhichitsupports
                           if no other sign is already placed in that sign band for the tenant space; and
                    d.      The placement maintains any spacing from the edge of an architectural feature,
                           building, or tenant space specifically identified in the Master Sign plan or other
                           sign approval or if no spacing is identified, maintains a definable space between
                           the sign and the edge of architectural features, the tenant space, and building.

(.05)  ClassIISignPermit.Signpermitrequestsformeetingoneormoreof thedescriptionslistedinA.
      throughC.belowshallbeprocessedasaClassIISignPermitwhentherequestdoesnotconform
      with a Master Sign Plan or other previous sign approval but meets the requirements of  the
      applicable sign regulations, unless the request would modify a condition of approval specifically
      imposed by the DRB or City Council:

      A.     Existing residential development;

      B.      Existingnon-residentialdevelopmentwithlessthanthreetenantsunlesstherequestinvolves
             a freestanding or ground mounted sign greater than eight feet in height in a new location;

      C.     NewdevelopmentorredevelopmentintheCoffeeCreekIndustrialDesignOverlayDistrict
             subject to a Class II administrative review process;

      D.     Major Adjustments to a Master Sign Plan when all of the following criteria are met:

             1.      The request is compatible with the pattern of signage established in the sign plan in
                    terms of  locations, placement on buildings, proportionality to fascia and building
                    facade, architectural design, and materials used;

             2.      The request is due to special conditions or circumstances that make it difficult to
                    comply with the established Master Sign Plan;

                                                        CD4:328
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.156.02

             3.      The request involves signs for a single tenant, a single multi-tenant freestanding or
                    groundmountedsign,oraseriesof similarrelatedmulti-tenantfreestandingorground
                    mounted signs in the same development; and
             4.      Therequestdoesnotinvolveafreestandingorgroundmountedsigngreaterthaneight
                    feet in height at a new location.
      E.    ClassIISignPermitSubmissionRequirements: Application for a Class II Sign Permit shall
             includetwopapercopiesandoneelectroniccopyof thefollowinginadditiontoallrequired
             fees:
             1.      Completed application form prescribed by the City and signed by the property owner
                    or their authorized representative;
             2.      Sign drawings or descriptions of  all materials, sign area and dimensions used to
                    calculate areas, lighting methods, and other details sufficient to judge the full scale of
                    the signs and related improvements;
             3.      Documentation of the lengths of building or tenant space facades used in calculating
                    maximum allowed sign area;
             4.      Drawings of all building facades on which signs are proposed indicating the areas of
                    the facades on which signs will be allowed; and
             5.      Narrativedescribingthescopeof theproject,includingwrittenfindingsaddressingall
                    applicablereviewcriteria,alongwithanyotherinformationshowinghowtheproposed
                    signage conforms with requirements for the applicable zone.
      F.     ClassIISignPermitReviewCriteria. Class II Sign Permits shall satisfy the sign regulations
             for the applicable zoning district and the Site Design Review Criteria in Sections 4.400
             through 4.421, as well as the following criteria:
             1.      Theproposedsignageiscompatiblewithdevelopmentsorusespermittedinthezonein
                    termsof design,materialsused,colorschemes,proportionality,andlocation,sothatit
                    doesnotinterferewithordetractfromthevisualappearanceof surroundingdevelop-
                    ment;
             2.      The proposed signage will not create a nuisance or result in a significant reduction in
                    the value or usefulness of surrounding development; and
             3.      Specialattentionispaidtotheinterfacebetweensignsandothersiteelementsincluding
                    building architecture and landscaping, including trees.
(.06)  Class III Sign Permit. Sign permit requests shall be processed as a Class III Sign Permit when
      associatedwithnewdevelopment,exceptasnotedinSubsection4.156.02(.05)C.,orredevelopment
      requiring DRB review, and not requiring a Master Sign Plan; when a sign permit request is
      associatedwithawaiverornon-administrativevariance;orwhenthesignpermitrequestinvolves
      one or more freestanding or ground mounted signs greater than eight feet in height in a new
      location.
      A.    Class III Sign Permit Submission Requirements. Ten paper and electronic copies of  the
             submissionrequirementsforClassIISignPermitsplusinformationonanyrequestedwaivers
             or variances in addition to all required fees.

                                                       CD4:329
§ 4.156.02                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      B.    Class III Sign Permit Review Criteria: The review criteria for Class II Sign Permits plus
             waiver or variance criteria when applicable.

(.07)  MasterSignPlans.AMasterSignPlanisrequiredfornon-residentialdevelopmentswiththreeor
      moretenants.IncreatingaMasterSignPlanthoughtshouldbegiventoneedsof initialtenantsas
      well as the potential needs of future tenants.

      A.    MasterSignPlanSubmissionRequirements.ApplicationsforMasterSignPlansshallinclude
             ten paper and electronic copies of all the submission requirements for Class II and III Sign
             Permits and the following in addition to all required fees:
             1.      Awrittenexplanationof theflexibilityof theMasterSignPlanfordifferentpotential
                    tenant space configurations over time;
             2.      A written explanation of the extent to which different sign designs, including those
                    incorporating logos, stylized letters, multiple lines of text, non-straight baselines, or
                    differentmaterialsandilluminationwillbeallowedandif allowedhowtheflexibilityof
                    the master sign plan will allow these different sign designs over time;
             3.      A written explanation of how the sign plan provides for a consistent and compatible
                    sign design throughout the subject development.

      B.    MasterSignPlanReviewCriteria.InadditiontothereviewcriteriaforClassIIandClassIII
             Sign Permits, Master Sign Plans shall meet the following criteria:
             1.      TheMasterSignPlanprovidesforconsistentandcompatibledesignof signsthrough-
                    out the development; and
             2.      The Master Sign Plan considers future needs, including potential different configura-
                    tions of tenant spaces and different sign designs, if allowed.

      C.    ModificationsofaMasterSignPlan.Modificationsof aMasterSignPlan,otherthanMinor
             and Major Adjustments, shall be reviewed the same as a new Master Sign Plan.

(.08)  Waivers and Variances. Waivers and variances are similar in that they allow deviation from
      requirementssuchasarea,andheightfromground.Theydifferinthatwaiversaregrantedbythe
      DRBaspartof acomprehensivereviewof thedesignandfunctionof anentiresitetobringabout
      animproveddesignandvariancesaregrantedbyeitherthePlanningDirectororDRBtorelievea
      specific hardship caused by the regulations.

      A.    Waivers.TheDRBmaygrantwaiversforsignarea,signheightfromground(nowaivershall
             be granted to allow signs to exceed 35 feet in height), number of signs, or use of electronic
             changeable copy signs in order to better implement the purpose and objectives of the sign
             regulations as determined by making findings that all of the following criteria are met:
             1.      The waiver will result in improved sign design, in regards to both aesthetics and
                    functionality.
             2.      Thewaiverwillresultinasignorsignsmorecompatiblewithandcomplementarytothe
                    overalldesignandarchitectureof asite,alongwithadjoiningproperties,surrounding
                    areas, and the zoning district than signs allowed without the waiver.

                                                       CD4:330
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.156.02

             3.      The waiver will result in a sign or signs that improve, or at least do not negatively
                    impact, public safety, especially traffic safety.

             4.      Sign content is not being considered when determining whether or not to grant a
                    waiver.

      B.    Variances:

             1.     AdministrativeVariance.InreviewingaSignPermitthePlanningDirectormaygrantor
                    deny a variance to relieve a hardship through the Class II Administrative Review
                    process.Suchavarianceshallonlybeapprovedwherethevariancedoesnotexceed20
                    percentof area,height,orsetbackrequirements.ThePlanningDirectorshallapprove
                    suchavarianceonlyuponfindingthattheapplicationcomplieswithallof therequired
                    variance criteria listed in Section 4.196.

             2.     Other Variances. In addition to the authority of  the Planning Director to issue
                    administrative variances as noted above, the Development Review Board may autho-
                    rizevariancesfromsignrequirementsof theCode,subjecttothestandardsandcriteria
                    listed in Section 4.196.

(.09)  TemporarySignPermits. Temporary sign permits shall be reviewed as follows:

      A.     30 days and less—Class I Administrative Review.

      B.      31 days up to 120 days—Class II Administrative Review.

      C.    SubmissionRequirements.Applicationsforatemporarysignpermitshallincludethefollow-
             ing in addition to the required application fee:

             1.      Completed application form prescribed by the City and signed by the property owner
                    or their authorized representative,

             2.      Two copies of  sign drawings or descriptions showing all materials, sign area and
                    dimensions used to calculate areas, number of signs, location and placement of signs,
                    and other details sufficient to judge the full scale of the sign or signs,

             3.      Information showing the proposed sign or signs conform with all applicable Code
                    requirements.

      D.    ReviewCriteria. Temporary Sign Regulations in Section 4.156.09.

      E.     When a temporary sign permit request is submitted as part of the broader temporary use
             permit request of the same duration, the sign request shall not require an additional fee.

(.10)  Waiverof Documentation.ThePlanningDirectormay,inhisorherdiscretion,waiveanapplica-
      tiondocumentforClassI,ClassII,andtemporarysignpermitswheretherequiredinformationhas
      alreadybeenmadeavailabletotheCity,orwherethePlanningDirectordeterminestheinformation
      contained in an otherwise required document is not necessary to review the application.
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

                                                       CD4:331
§ 4.156.03                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.156.03. Sign Measurement.

(.01)  SignArea:

      A.    CabinetSignsandSimilar:Theareaforsignsenclosedbycabinet,frame,orotherbackground
             (including lighted surface) not otherwise part of the architecture of a building or structure
             shall be the area of a shape drawn around the outer dimension of the cabinet, frame, or
             background.

             1.      If the cabinet, frame, or background is an irregular shape the signs perimeter shall be
                    measured the same as an individual element sign under B. below.

             2.      The sign area does not include:

                    a.      Foundations, supports, and other essential structures that are not designed to
                           serve as a backdrop or border to the sign;

                    b.      Architectural elements of a freestanding or ground mounted sign designed to
                           match or complement the architectural design of buildings on the site not and
                           otherwise meeting the definition of a sign;

                    c.      A pole or other structural support, unless such pole or structural support is
                           internally illuminated or otherwise so designed to constitute a display device.

                              Figure S-1. Measurement of Cabinet or Similar Signs

      B.    Individual Element Signs: The area for signs constructed of individual elements (letters,
             figures, etc.) attached to a building wall or similar surface or structure shall be the summed
             area of up to three squares, rectangles, circles, or triangles drawn around all sign elements.

             1.      Thedescenderonthelowercaseletters"q,y,pg,orj."shallnotbeincludedinsignarea
                    whentheletterotherwisematchesthefontof otherlettersinthesign,thedescenderis
                    nomorethan½thecapheightof thefont,andthedescenderisnowiderthanthemain
                    body of the letter.

                                                         CD4:332
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.156.03

                             Figure S-2. Measurement of Individual Element Signs

      C.    RoundorThree-DimensionalSigns.Theareaof aroundorthree-dimensionalsignshallbethe
             maximumsurfaceareavisiblefromanyonelocationonthegroundmeasuredthesameasA.
             above except if the maximum surface area is an irregular shape the signs perimeter shall be
             measured the same as an individual element sign under B. above.

      D.    AwningorMarqueeSigns.Theareaof signsincorporatedintoawningsormarqueesshallbe
             the area of the entire panel containing the sign measured the same as A. above unless it is
             clear that part of the panel contains no sign-related display or decoration, other than the
             background color of the awning.

      E.    PaintedWallSigns. The area of painted wall signs shall be determined as follows:

             1.      If individual elements are painted without a background it shall be calculated in the
                   manner indicated in B. above.

             2.      If a background is painted it shall be calculated in the manner indicated in A. above.

      F.     TemporarySigns.Theareaof temporarysignsincludingbanners,lawnsigns,andrigidsigns
             shall be calculated in the manner indicated in A. above.

      G.     Unlessotherwisespecified,thesignareaof atwo-sidedsign,withtwomatchingsides,shallbe
             consideredtobetheareaof oneside.Forexample,thesignareaof atwo-sidedsignhaving32
             square feet per sign face shall be considered to be 32 square feet, unless this Code specifies
             otherwise.

(.02)  SignHeightaboveGround:

      A.     The height above ground of a freestanding or ground-mounted sign is measured from the
             averagegradedirectlybelowthesigntothehighestpointof thesignorsignstructureexcept
             as follows:

             1.      Afreestandingorgroundmountedsignonaman-madebase,includingagradedearth
                   mound, shall be measured from the grade of the nearest pavement or top of any
                   pavementcurbtothehighestpointof thesignorsignstructure.Inallcasessignsona
                   berm shall be allowed to be eight feet in height from the top of the berm.

                                                      CD4:333
§ 4.156.03                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      Afreestandingorgroundmountedsignplacedbelowtheelevationof theright-of-way
                    itfrontsshallbemeasuredfromthelowestpointintheright-of-wayalongthefrontage
                    to the highest point of the sign.

                      Figure S-3. How to Measure Height of a Freestanding or Ground
                                                  Mounted Sign

(.03)  SignHeightandLength:

      A.     Height of a sign is the vertical distance between the lowest and highest points of the sign.

      B.      Length of a sign is the horizontal distance between the furthest left and right points of the
             sign.

(.04)  FinalDeterminationof SignMeasurement. The Planning Director shall be responsible for deter-
      miningthearea,heightabovegroundandheightandlengthof asign,subjecttoappealasspecified
      in Section 4.022. Applicants for sign plans and permits shall provide the dimensions needed to
      calculate the area, height above ground, height, and length.

Section  4.156.04. Non-Conforming Signs.

(.01)  Non-Conforming Signs. Non-conforming signs, which may be non-conforming structures or
      non-conforming uses, are subject to the standards for non-conforming uses and non-conforming
      structuresdelineatedinSections4.189through4.190.Except,however,thatanon-conformingsign
      that is damaged beyond 50 percent of its value, as determined by the City Building Official, may
      only be reconstructed if  the reconstructed sign meets all applicable zoning, structural, and
      electricalstandardsapplicableatthetimeof reconstruction.NothinginthisSectionisintendedto
      impairanypreviouslyapprovedsignpermitthathasbeenissuedbytheCityof Wilsonville,subject
      to state or federal law, or to require the removal of any sign that was legally erected or installed
      priortotheeffectivedateof theseregulations.Intheeventthatapreviouslyerectedorinstalledsign
      nolongermeetsapplicableCityzoningstandardsitmayremaininplace,subjecttothestandards
      for non-conforming uses or nonconforming structures noted above. However, a sign that is
      requiredtobemovedsolelybecauseof apublictakingmaybereplacedonthesite,andmaintain
      itsnon-conformingstatus,subjecttoaClassIISignPermit,providedthereplacementsignisfound
      to not increase in non-conformity to current Code standards other than required setbacks.

                                                      CD4:334
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.156.05

Section  4.156.05. Signs Exempt from Sign Permit Requirements.

(.01)  Thefollowingsignsareexemptfromthepermitrequirementsof thisCodeanddonotrequiresign
      permits. Unless otherwise specified, the area of the exempted signs shall not be included in the
      calculations of sign area permitted on a given site:

      A.     Trafficorothergovernmentalordirectionalsigns,asmaybeauthorizedbytheCityorother
             units of government having jurisdiction within the City.
      B.      Signs installed by public utility companies indicating danger, or which serve as an aid to
             public safety, or which show the location of utilities or public facilities, including under-
             ground utilities.

      C.     Flags displayed from permanently-located freestanding or wall-mounted flagpoles that are
             designedtoallowraisingandloweringof flags.Onesitemayhaveuptotwoexemptflags;no
             exempt flag may be more than 30 feet in height.

(.02)  Other Signs. No sign permit is necessary before placing, constructing or erecting the following
      signs.However,inallotherparticularssuchsignsshallconformtotherequirementsof applicable
      Building and Electrical Codes, as well as this Code.
      A.     Signs inside a building except for prohibited signs listed in Section 4.156.06.

      B.    NamePlatesandAnnouncements:
             1.      A sign identifying the name, street address, occupation and/or profession of  the
                    occupant of the premises in the aid of public health and safety. One name plate, not
                    exceeding a total of three square feet shall be allowed for each occupant. The name
                    plate shall be affixed to the building.
             2.      Announcements posted on a given property (e.g., no smoking, no parking, rules of
                    conduct,etc.)andnotintendedtobereadfromoff-site,arepermittedtobelocatedas
                    needed. Such announcements shall not be considered to be part of the sign allotment
                    for the property.
      C.    DirectionalSigns. Designed for non-changing messages, directional signs facilitate the safe
             movement of the traveling public. Such signs are subject to the following standards and
             conditions:
             1.      The sign area does not exceed three (square feet per sign face,
             2.      The sign location is not within public rights-of-way and meets City vision clearance
                    requirements;
             3.      No sign lighting;
             4.      No logo or a logo that does not exceed one square foot in size; and
             5.      No more than one directional sign is located on the same tax lot.

      D.     Changesof CopyOnly,wherethegraphicscontainedonanexistingsignarechanged,butthe
             sign itself is not structurally altered, and no building or electrical permit is required.

      E.     Signs not visible from any off-site location.

                                                        CD4:335
§ 4.156.05                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      F.      Holiday lights and decorations, in place between November 15 and January 15.
      G.     Signs on scoreboards or ballfields located on public property.
      H.     One small decorative banner per dwelling unit placed on site, in residential zones.

      I.      Lawn Signs meeting the standards of Table S-1 and the following conditions:
             1.      Such signs shall not be intentionally illuminated and shall not display movement.
             2.      Suchsignsshallnotobscuresightlinesof themotoringpublic,obscuretrafficorother
                    government signs, or create a nuisance to the use or occupancy of any property.
             3.      Lawn signs associated with temporary events may be posted no longer than 60 days
                    before the beginning of an event and must be removed at the event's completion.
             4.      Lawnsignsnotassociatedwithtemporaryeventsmaybepostedforoneperiodof upto
                    60 days in a calendar year.
             5.      Such signs may be up to six feet in height.
             6.      Such signs may be one or two sided.
      J.       Rigid Signs meeting the standards of Table S-1 and the following conditions:
             1.      Such signs shall not be intentionally illuminated and shall not display movement.
             2.      Suchsignsshallnotobscuresightlinesof themotoringpublic,obscuretrafficorother
                    government signs, or create a nuisance to the use or occupancy of any property.
             3.      Such signs may be up to six feet in height, except signs on lots with an active
                    construction project (active building permit), which may be up to ten feet in height.
                    (Note that signs exceeding six feet in height typically require building permits.)
             4.      Such signs may be one, two, or three sided.
             5.      On Residential and Agriculture zoned lots:
                    a.      Arigidsignnotassociatedwithanongoingtemporaryeventmaybedisplayedfor
                           no more than 60 days each calendar year.
                    b.      Arigidsignassociatedwithanongoingtemporaryeventmaybedisplayedforthe
                           durationof thatevent.Note:Section4.156.06(.01)Q.of thisCodeprohibitssigns
                           associated with temporary events to remain posted after the completion of the
                           event.
             6.      On Commercial, Industrial, or Public Facility zoned lots:
                    a.      Arigidsignnotassociatedwithanongoingtemporaryeventmaybedisplayedfor
                           no more than 90 days each calendar year.
                    b.      Arigidsignassociatedwithanongoingtemporaryeventmaybedisplayedforthe
                           duration of that temporary event. Note: Section 4.156.06(.01)Q. of this Code
                           prohibits signs associated with temporary events to remain posted after the
                           completion of the event.
                    c.      Atemporaryeventmusthaveanend,markedbytheoccurrenceof aspecifically
                           anticipateddateorhappening.Atemporaryeventmaynotbeapartof abroader,

                                                        CD4:336
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.156.06

                           continuing event or of  related, serial events. Temporary events shall not be
                           defined by content, but may include isolated merchandise sales or discounts, or
                           availability of real estate for sale or lease.

      K.     Signs allowed in Subsections 6.150(1) and (2) Wilsonville Code for special events.

Section  4.156.06. Prohibited Signs.

(.01)  ProhibitedSigns. The following signs are prohibited and shall not be placed within the City:

      A.     Searchlights,strobelights,andsignscontainingstrobelightsorotherflashinglights,unless
             specifically approved in a sign permit.

      B.      Obstructingsigns,asignorsignstructuresuchthatanyportionof itssurfaceorsupportswill
             interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, hydrant, standpipe, or the
             exterior of  any window; any sign projecting more than 12 inches from a wall, except
             projecting signs that are specifically permitted through the provisions of this Code.

      C.     Changing image signs, including those within windows.

      D.     Changeable copy signs that use lighting changed digitally, unless specifically approved
             through a waiver process connected with a Class III Sign Permit or Master Sign Plan. In
             granting a waiver for a digital changeable copy signs the DRB shall ensure the following
             criteria will be met:

             1.      The sign shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology which automatically
                    adjuststhesign'sbrightnessindirectcorrelationwithambientlightconditionsandthe
                    signownershallensureappropriatefunctioningof thedimmingtechnologyforthelife
                    of the sign.

             2.      The luminance of the sign shall not exceed 5,000 candelas per square meter between
                    sunrise and sunset, and 500 candelas per square meter between sunset and sunrise.

      E.     Roof signs-signsplacedonthetopof abuildingorattachedtothebuildingandprojecting
             above the top of that building, unless specifically approved through the temporary sign
             permitproceduresorthearchitecturaldesignof abuildingmakestheslopeof theroof below
             thepeakapracticablelocationof signsonabuildingandthegenerallocationof signsonthe
             roof is approved by the DRB during Stage II Approval, as applicable, and Site Design
             Review.

      F.      Signs obstructing vision clearance areas.

      G.     Pennants,streamers,festoonlights,balloons,andothersimilardevicesintendedtobemoved
             by the wind, unless specifically authorized in an approved sign permit.

      H.     Signs attached to trees, public sign posts, or public utility poles, other than those placed by
             appropriate government agencies or public utilities.

                                                       CD4:337
§ 4.156.06                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      I.      Signs using bare-bulb illumination or signs lighted so that the immediate source of illumi-
             nation is visible, unless specifically authorized by the Development Review Board or City
             Council such as Digital Changeable Copy Signs. This is not intended to prohibit the use of
             neon or LED's as a source of illumination.

      J.       Signs that use flame as a source of light or that emit smoke or odors.

      K.     Any sign, including a window sign, which is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
             sign or signal; and which may include display of words or graphics that are likely to cause
             confusion for the public, such as "STOP," "GO," "SLOW," "CAUTION," "DANGER,"
             "WARNING," etc.

      L.     Anysign,includingawindowsign,whichbyreasonof itssize,location,movements,content,
             coloringormannerof illuminationmaybeconfusedwith,orconstruedas,atrafficcontrol
             device, or which hides from view any traffic sign, signal, or device.

      M.    Portablesigns,exceedingsixsquarefeetof signareaperside,otherthanthoseonvehiclesor
             trailers.Thedisplayof signsonavehicleortrailerisprohibitedwherethevehicleortraileris
             notfullyoperationalforuseonpublicroadsorwheretheprimaryfunctionof thevehicleor
             trailer is advertising. Examples where the primary function of  the vehicle or trailer is
             advertisingincludemobilebillboardssuchasthoseonwhichadvertisingspaceisrented,sold,
             or leased.

      N.     Signs located on public property in violation of Section 4.156.10.

      O.     Signs placed on private property without the property owner's permission.

      P.      Signserectedorinstalledinviolationof standardsprescribedbytheCityof Wilsonville,State
             of Oregon or the U.S. government.

      Q.     Signs associated with temporary events, after the temporary event is completed.

      R.     Anyprivatesigns,includingwindowsigns,withaluminancegreaterthan5,000candelasper
             squaremeterbetweensunriseandsunsetand500candelaspersquaremeterbetweensunset
             and sunrise.

      S.      Video Signs.

Section  4.156.07. Sign Regulations in Residential Zones.

(.01)  GroundMountedSignsforResidentialDevelopments.Onegroundmountedsign,notexceeding18
      square feet in area and six feet in height above ground, shall be permitted for each residential
      subdivision or for any multi-family development.

      A.     Additionalgroundmountedsignsof 18squarefeetorlessshallbepermittedforadditional
             entrances to the subdivision or development located on a separate street frontage or on the
             same street frontage located at least 200 feet apart.

      B.      Foroneentranceonastreetfrontage,anadditionalgroundmountedsignmaybeplacedon
             opposite side of the street or private drive at the intersection.

                                                       CD4:338
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.156.08

(.02)  GroundMountedSignsforOutdoorRecreationalAreasonSeparateLots.Publicorprivateparksor
      other similar outdoor recreational areas on separate lots than dwelling units are allowed one
      ground mounted sign of 18 square feet or less in area and six feet or less in height above ground.

(.03)  Non-ResidentialUses.Uses,otherthanresidentialandoutdoorrecreation,shallbesubjecttothe
      sign regulations for PDC, TC, TPDI, and Public Facility zones.
(Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Section  4.156.08. Sign Regulations in the PDC, TC, PDI, and PF Zones.

(.01)  FreestandingandGroundMountedSigns:

      A.     One freestanding or ground mounted sign is allowed for the first 200 linear feet of site
             frontage.Oneadditionalfreestandingorgroundmountedsignmaybeaddedforthroughand
             cornerlotshavingatleast200feetof frontageononestreetorright-of-wayand100feeton
             the other street or right-of-way.

      B.      Theallowedheightabovegroundof afreestandingorgroundmountedsignis20feetexcept
             as noted in 1-2 below.

             1.      Themaximumallowedheightabovegroundforsignsalongthefrontageof Interstate5,
                    andparallelcontiguousportionsof streets,asidentifiedinFigureS-4,associatedwith
                    multiple tenants or businesses may be increased by three feet for each tenant space of
                    10,00 square feet or more of gross floor area up to a maximum of 35 feet.

             2.      The allowed height above ground for signs in the TC Zone, Old Town Overlay Zone,
                    and PDI Zone is eight feet, except those signs along the frontage of Interstate 5 and
                    parallel contiguous portions of streets identified in Figure S-4.

      C.     The maximum allowed area for each freestanding or ground-mounted sign is determined
             based on gross floor area and number of tenant spaces:

             1.      Forfrontagesalongstreetsotherthanthoseindicatedintwobelowsignareaallowedis
                    calculated as follows:
                    a.      The sign area allowed for signs pertaining to a single tenant:

                        Gross Floor Area in a Single Building       Maximum Allowed Sign Area
                        Less than 11,000 sq. ft.                              32 sq. ft.
                        11,000—25,999 sq. ft.                                32 sq. ft. + 2 sq. ft. per 1,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                          floor area greater than 10,000 rounded
                                                                          down to the nearest 1,000 sq. ft.
                        26,000 sq. ft. or more                                 64 sq. ft.
                           i.       ForPF(PublicFacility)zonedpropertiesadjacenttoresidentialzonedland
                                  the maximum allowed area is 32 square feet.
                    b.      The maximum allowed sign area for signs pertaining to multiple tenants or
                           businesses is 32 square feet plus the following for each tenant space:

                                                        CD4:339
§ 4.156.08                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                            Additional Allowed Sign Area for Tenant
                         Gross Floor Area of Tenant Space                   Space
                         Less than 1,000 sq. ft.                                3 sq. ft.
                         1,000—10,999                                             3 sq. ft. + 3 sq. ft. per 1,000 sq. ft. of
                                                                            floor area rounded down to the nearest
                                                                            1,000 sq. ft.
                         11,000 sq. ft. or more                                 32 sq. ft.
                            i.       Thetotalsignareashallnotexceed200squarefeet,exceptintheTCZone,
                                   OldTownOverlayZone,andPDIZonethetotalsignareashallnotexceed
                                   80 square feet.
                            ii.      Though the maximum allowed sign area is calculated based on number of
                                   tenant spaces and their size, the content of  the sign and area used for
                                   different content is at the discretion of the sign owner, except for required
                                   addressing.

              2.      Signs fronting Interstate 5 and parallel contiguous street sections, as identified in
                     Figure S-4.
                     a.      For signs on properties or within developments with a single tenant or business
                            the sign area allowed is 64 square feet.
                     b.      For signs on properties or within developments with multiple tenants or busi-
                            nesses the maximum allowed area is 64 square feet plus an additional 32 square
                            feetforeachtenantspaceof 10,000squarefeetormoreof grossfloorareaupto
                            a maximum total sign area of 300 square feet.
                            i.       Thoughthesignareaallowediscalculatedbasedonnumberof largetenant
                                   spaces, the content of the sign and area used for different content is at the
                                   discretion of the sign owner, except for any required addressing.

       D.     Pole or sign support placement shall be installed in a full vertical position.

       E.     Freestandingandgroundmountedsignsshallnotextendintoorabovepublicrights-of-way,
              parking areas, or vehicle maneuvering areas.

       F.      Thelocationof freestandingorgroundmountedsignslocatedadjacenttoornearthePublic
              Right-of-Way shall be in compliance with the City's Public Works Standards for sight
              distance clearance. Prior to construction, the location of the sign shall be approved by the
              City of Wilsonville Engineering Division.

       G.     Freestanding and ground mounted signs shall be designed to match or complement the
              architectural design of buildings on the site.

       H.     Forfreestandingandgroundmountedsignsgreaterthaneightfeetinheight,thewidthof the
              sign shall not exceed the height.

       I.      AlongstreetfrontagesintheTCZoneandOldTownOverlayZonemonumentstylesignsare
              required.

                                                         CD4:340
                        PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                             § 4.156.08

J.       Freestanding and ground mounted signs shall be no further than 15 feet from the property
      line and no closer than two feet from a sidewalk or other hard surface in the public
      right-of-way.

K.     Except for those signs fronting Interstate 5, freestanding and ground mounted signs shall
      includetheaddressnumberof associatedbuildingsunlessotherwiseapprovedinwritingby
      the City and the Fire District.

L.     Whenasignisdesignedbasedonthenumberof plannedtenantspacesitshallremainalegal,
      conformingsignregardlessof thechangeinthenumberof tenantsorconfigurationof tenant
      spaces.

                                              CD4:341
§ 4.156.08                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                                 CD4:342
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.156.08

(.02)  SignsonBuildings:

       A.    Sign Eligible Facades. Building signs are allowed on a facade of a tenant space or single
              tenant building when one or more of the following criteria are met:

              1.      The facade has one or more entrances open to the general public;
              2.      Thefacadefacesalotlinewithfrontageonastreetorprivatedrivewithacrosssection
                     similartoapublicstreet,andnootherbuildingsonthesamelotobstructtheviewof the
                     building facade from the street or private drive; or

              3.      The facade is adjacent to the primary parking area for the building or tenant.

       B.    SignAreaAllowed:

              1.      Thesignareaallowedforallbuildingsignsonasigneligiblefaçadeisshowninthetable
                     below:

                           Linear Length of Façade (feet)            Sign Area Allowed*
                   Less than 16                                                     Area equal to linear length
                   16 to 24                                                            24 sq. ft.
                   Greater than 24 to 32                                     32 sq. ft.
                   Greater than 32 to 36                                     Area equal to linear length

                                                            CD4:343
§ 4.156.08                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                         Linear Length of Façade (feet)            Sign Area Allowed*
                  Greater than 36 to 72                                     36 sq. ft.
                  Greater than 72                                               36 sq. ft. plus 12 sq. ft. for each 24 linear
                                                                       feet or portion thereof greater than 72 up
                                                                       to a maximum of 200 sq. ft.

                    * Exceptas noted in 2. through5. below
             2.      The sign area allowed for facades with a primary public entrance or with a frontage
                    alongapublicstreetdominatedbywindowsorglazingmaybeincreasedbytransferring
                    tothefaçadeuptoone-half thesignareaallowedforadjacentfacadesupto50square
                    feet.Innocaseshalltheallowedsignareaexceedanareaequaltothelinearlengthof
                    the façade.
             3.      The sign area allowed is increased as follows for signs at separate building entrances:
                    a.      Forbuildingentrancesopentothegeneralpubliclocatedatleast50feetaparton
                           thesamefacade,thesignareaallowedisincreasedby50percentupto50square
                           feet.
                    b.      Forbuildingentranceslocatedlessthan50feetapartonthesamefacades,thesign
                           area allowed is increased by 20 percent up to 20 square feet.
             4.      For businesses occupying multiple buildings in a campus setting, sign area shall be
                    limitedtothatallowedforthelargestbuilding.whichmaythenbedistributedthrough-
                    out the campus.
             5.      If afaçadeotherwisenotsigneligiblefacesalotlinewithfrontageonInterstate5,the
                    applicantcantransfersignareaallowedfromoneof thelocationsdescribedina.andb.
                    below. In no case shall the allowed sign area exceed an area equal to the allowed sign
                    area for a sign eligible façade of the same linear length.
                    a.      The freestanding sign along the Interstate 5 frontage. This generally involves
                           placing building signs on the subject façade in lieu of installing a freestanding
                           sign.
                    b.      Adjacentfaçadeupto50squarefeet,whenamajorityof theadjacentfaçadefrom
                           which the sign area is being transferred is visible from Interstate 5.
             6.      Calculating linear length of a façade for the purpose of determining maximum sign
                    areaallowed.Forfacadesof asingletenantbuildingthelengththefacademeasuredat
                    the building line, except as noted in a. and b. below. For multi-tenant buildings the
                    width of the façade of the tenant space shall be measured from the centerline of the
                    party walls or the outer extent of the exterior wall at the building line, as applicable,
                    except as noted in a. and b. below. Applicants shall provide the dimensions needed to
                    calculate the length. Each tenant space or single occupant building shall not be
                    considered to have more than five total facades.
                    a.      If afaçadeiscurvilinear,stepped,orotherwisenotastraightline,thefaçadeshall
                           bemeasuredbydrawingastraightlinebetweentheedgesof thefaçadeasshown
                           in the figure below.

                                                        CD4:344
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.156.08

                     b.      For an "L" shaped tenant space or single tenant building the longest leg of the
                            interior of the "L" shall be basis for measuring the length of the L-shaped facade.
                            Sign area allowed based on the longest leg can be distributed between legs.

       C.     The length of individual tenant signs shall not exceed 75 percent of the length of the facade
              of the tenant space.

       D.     The height of building signs shall be within a definable sign band, fascia, or architectural
              feature and allow a definable space between the sign and the top and bottom of the sign band,
              fascia, or architectural feature.
       E.     Types of signs permitted on buildings include wall flat, fascia, projecting, blade, marquee and
              awning signs. Roof-top signs are prohibited.

(.03)  Additional signs. Notwithstanding the signs allowed based on the site in (.01) and (.02) above, the
       following signs may be permitted, subject to standards and conditions in this Code:
       A.     Directional  Signs.  In  addition  to  exempt  directional  signs  allowed  under  Subsection
              4.156.05(.02)C. freestanding or ground mounted directional signs six square feet or less in
              area and four feet or less in height:
              1.      The signs shall be designed to match or complement the architectural design of
                     buildings on the site;
              2.      The signs shall only be placed at the intersection of internal circulation drives; and
              3.      No more than one sign shall be placed per intersection corner with no more than two
                     signs per intersection.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:345
§ 4.156.08                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

       B.      Planned Development Signs. Up to 32 square feet of the allowed sign area for freestanding
              signs in a planned development may be used for a separate on-site monument sign or off-site
              monument sign on an adjacent parcel identifying the Planned Development project.
       C.     Blade Signs. To aid in pedestrian wayfinding, one blade sign, not to exceed six square feet, per
              facade eligible for building signs. Blade signs over pedestrian accessible areas shall provide a
              minimum of eight feet of clearance from the ground.
       D.     Fuel or Service Station Price Signs. In addition to the freestanding or ground mounted signs
              allowed, changeable copy signs shall be allowed for the purpose of advertising fuel prices,
              subject to the following standards and conditions:
              1.      The signs shall have a maximum of 11 square feet in area per face per type of fuel sold
                     and shall be permanently affixed to the building or a freestanding sign.
              2.      The signs shall not be considered in calculating the sign area or number of  signs
                     allowed.
              3.      Signs on fuel pumps shall be permitted, providing that they do not project beyond the
                     outer edge of the pump in any direction.
(Ord. No. 835, 6-5-2019)

Section  4.156.09.  Temporary Signs in all Zones.

In addition to the permanent signs allowed in different zones and exempt temporary signs, unless
specifically prohibited in a master sign plan or other sign approval, the following temporary signs may be
permitted through a temporary sign permit:
       (.01)  General Allowance. Except as noted in subsection (.02) below up to two temporary signs not
              exceeding a combined total of 24 square feet may be permitted per lot or non-residential
              tenant. Such signs may be banners, rigid signs, lawn signs, portable signs, or other signs of
              similar construction.
       (.02)  Opening Banner for a New Business or Housing Development. A banner corresponding with
              the opening of a new business or housing development may be permitted, subject to the
              following standards and conditions:
              A.     One such banner shall be allowed either from the date of issuance of Building Permits
                     until four weeks after issuance of Certificates of Occupancy, or if no Building Permit is
                     issued, for four weeks after occupancy of a new business.
              B.      Such banner may be two-sided but shall not exceed 32 square feet per face.
              C.     Such signs shall not be permitted at the same time as general allowance signs in (.01)
                     above.
       (.03)  Annual Event Signs. Up to ten lawn signs may be permitted to be located in the public
              right-of-way for up to 14 days if all of the following are met:
              A.     Signs will not be located in the areas listed in Subsection 4.156.10(.01)A.4.
              B.      The applicant or event has not been issued a permit for and placed signs in the public
                     right-of-way in the previous six months;

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:346
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.156.10

              C.     Not more than one other permit has been issued for lawn signs in the right-of-way
                     during the time period the applicant is requesting;
              D.     The event to which the signs pertain is expected to attract 250 or more people;
              E.     The request is not in addition to exempt lawn signs for large special events allowed for
                     in Section 6.150; and
              F.      The applicant has indicated on a map the exact locations the signs will be placed and
                     has submitted an application along with the required fee.

       (.04)  Inflatable Signs. Inflatable signs may be permitted for a maximum of 15 days of display use
              in any calendar year subject to the following standards and conditions:
              A.     Does not exceed ten feet in overall height; and

              B.      If attached to a building in any manner, it meets applicable building Code requirements
                     including consideration of wind loads.
(Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.156.10.  Signs on City and ODOT Right-of-Way.

(.01)  Signs on City Property. For the purposes of this section, City property is defined as physical sites,
       City rights-of-way, and rights-of-way over which the City has jurisdiction. City property includes,
       but is not limited to, the following: City Hall, the Community Center, the Library, parks and open
       space, Transit and Fleet Building, SMART Central, and the City's reservoir, pump station, and
       treatment plant properties.

       A.     Allowed Signs. The following signs may be placed on City property and/or City rights-of-way
              and rights-of-way over which the City has jurisdiction under the following conditions:
              1.      Such signs as are necessary to locate and direct the public to City premises, or other
                     governmental premises.

              2.      Such signs as are necessary for the public's health, safety and welfare authorized under
                     law, regulation, ordinance, or order including but not limited to traffic signs. This shall
                     include signs authorized to conform with the State's Tourism Information program and
                     any similar local government program.
              3.      Signs and their placement as authorized in subsections 1 and 2, above, shall meet all
                     other applicable standards and criteria under law, regulation, ordinance, or order.
              4.      Lawn signs may be placed, subject to the standards in subsection 4.156.10(.01)A.5.,
                     below, on City rights-of-way and rights-of-way over which the City has jurisdiction
                     except 1) those rights-of-way adjoining City properties defined in subsection 4.156.10(.01)
                     above, and 2) in the following locations where the placement of signs could damage
                     landscaping or interfere with the maintenance of the rights-of-way:
                     a.      In any median or landscaped strip inside the City limits as identified below in
                            Sections 4.156.10(.01)A.4.b. through p.
                     b.      Either side of French Prairie Road.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:347
§ 4.156.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                     c.      Either side of Canyon Creek Road North, from Boeckman Road to Elligsen
                            Road.
                     d.      Either side of Wilsonville Road between Town Center Loop East and the Port-
                            land & Western (previously Burlington Northern) Railroad property.
                     e.      Either side of Town Center Loop West and East.
                     f.       Both sides of former S.W. Parkway frontage between Town Center Loop West
                            and Wilsonville Road.
                     g.      Wilsonville Road between Willamette Way West and Willamette Way East.
                     h.      The north side of Wilsonville Road from Town Center Loop East to Boeckman
                            Creek.
                     i.       Either side of  Wilsonville Road between Boeckman Road and the southern
                            boundary of the Wilsonville High School property.
                     j.       Either side of Parkway Center Avenue.
                     k.      The south side of Elligsen Road from the eastern City limits to a point directly
                            across from the west side of the Tualatin Valley Fire District fire station.
                     l.       Either side of Boeckman Road and all islands, from the railroad tracks west to
                            110th.
                     m.     Either side of 110th between Barber Street and Boeckman Road.
                     n.      The eastern side of Grahams Ferry Road from Tooze Road to the City limits.
                     o.      Either side of Barber Street between 110th and Brown Road, including islands
                            and roundabouts.
                     p.      Such other areas as the City may designate as requiring protection from land-
                            scape damage.
              5.      Lawn signs shall meet the following standards and conditions:
                     a.      Allowed only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. Friday and 8:00 p.m. Sunday, and
                            the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Tuesdays;
                     b.      Not greater than 30 inches in height. A-frame signs may be 24" by 36" provided
                            that they are designed to meet vision clearance requirements (typically not over
                            30 inches in height when standing);
                     c.      Not placed on street surfaces, sidewalks, paths, median strips, or bicycle ways;
                     d.      Located within 40 feet of an intersection;
                     e.      No more than three signs per person; and
                     f.       Placed no more than one every 50 feet and at least ten feet away from any other
                            temporary sign.
              6.      Banners on public light and other poles identified in a plan maintained or adopted by
                     the City and installed by or under arrangement with the Public Works Department.

(.02)  Signs within ODOT Right-of-Way. Consistent with the Laws and Administrative Rules of the State
       of Oregon, all signs of any kind are prohibited within right-of-way of the Oregon Department of

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:348
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.156.11

       Transportation (ODOT), except those signs that are specifically determined by ODOT to be
       necessary for the public's health, safety, or welfare. The City may assist the State in the removal of
       signs that are illegally placed within ODOT right-of-way, as provided above for signs in City
       right-of-way. City assistance is justified in view of  the substantial public investment that has
       recently been made to improve and beautify both freeway interchange areas north of the Wil-
       lamette River.

Section  4.156.11.  Sign Enforcement.

(.01)  General. Any person who places a sign that requires a permit under this section, and who fails to
       obtain a permit before installing the sign, shall be subject to penalties and fines as established in
       Wilsonville Code 4.025.

(.02)  Removal of Signs. Any sign placed on public property in violation of the provisions of this Code
       shall be immediately removed by the City. As soon thereafter as reasonable, the City shall notify the
       owner or the owner's representative that the sign has been removed, and that if the sign is not
       claimed within ten days, the sign will be deemed abandoned and subject to disposal by the City. The
       City shall have no responsibility to contact the owner of the sign if the owner's name, address, and
       telephone number are not clearly indicated on the sign and shall dispose of the sign ten days after
       its removal by the City. The City Council may establish fees to be collected at the time of releasing
       impounded signs in order to cover the City's costs in collecting, storing, and returning these signs
       and administering the sign removal program.

(.03)  Civil Enforcement. Any sign which is intentionally placed in violation of the provisions of this
       Code after the owner of the sign has been notified of the initial sign removal and reason for its
       removal, shall subject the owner to a civil violation not to exceed $100.00 as and for a civil fine for
       each day that a violation continues to exist.

(.04)  Additional enforcement. The remedies described herein are not exclusive and may be used in
       addition to those prescribed elsewhere in the Wilsonville Code, including Sections 1.012 and 1.013,
       Violations, and 6.200 through 6.620, Nuisances. The City Attorney may use any enforcement
       process available at law or equity, including but not limited to, seeking injunctive relief, equitable
       relief, damages, or fines for violations.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:349
§ 4.156.11                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                                                          Lawn Signs                   Rigid Signs                  Maximum Combined
Sign Location                                             [see WC 4.156.05             [see WC                      Lawn and Rigid
Description                                               (.02) I.]                    4.156.05 (.02) J.]           Signs
Part 1. General Allowances for Lawn and Rigid Signs
Residential or Agri-
culture zoned lots.1     Area per sign face       6 sq. ft.                         6 sq. ft.Exempt at one time     3 signs per lot              1 sign per lot                3 signs per lot

Commercial, Indus-           Area per sign face       6 sq. ft.                         32 sq. ft.
trial, or Public Facil-      Exempt at one time     3 signs per lot              1 sign per lot, plus 1             3 signs per lot, plus 1
ity zoned lots.2                                                                       additional sign if the       additional rigid sign if
                                                                                       lot is more than 3           the lot is more than 3
                                                                                       acres in area or has         acres in area or has
                                                                                       multiple street front-       multiple street front-
                                                                                       ages                         ages.
Part 2. Additional Special Allowances for Rigid Signs3
Lots with active             Area per sign face                                              64 sq. ft.
commercial, indus-           Exempt at one time                                           1 sign per lot
trial, public facility,
or multi-family con-
struction projects.4
Residential or Agri-         Area per sign face                                              32 sq. ft.
culture tracts of land       Exempt at one time                                           1 sign per qualifying
in excess of 5 acres                                                                   tract or subdivision
or recorded residen-
tial subdivisions with
more than 25% of
the lots remaining
unsold and undevel-
oped.
1  Residential and Agriculture zones include all PDR (Planned Development Residential) zones, along with the
   R (Residential), RA-H (Residential Agriculture-Holding) zone, and any county-zoned land within Wilsonville
   City limits. In addition, lots not zoned Residential, but designated exclusively for residential use in an ap-
   proved Master Plan, shall be considered residentially-zoned for the purposes of this table. This includes resi-
2  Commercial, Industrial, Public Facility zones include all PDC (Planned Development Commercial), PDI dential lots and in the Village Zone.

   (Planned Development Industrial), and PF (Public Facility) zones. In addition, lots zoned Village, but desig-
   nated for commercial, mixed-use, or publicly-owned use in an approved Master Plan, shall fall under this de-
3    Sign allowances in Part 2 are in addition to the allowances and maximums in Part 1.scription category for the purposes of this table.

4  An active construction project means a construction project for which any required building permits have
   been obtained and for which the City Building Official has not approved building occupancy. When the Build-
   ing Official issues a temporary Certificate of Occupancy, the construction project shall be considered active
   until a permanent Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Active construction projects involving churches, private
   schools, or other non-single-family uses are included in this description.
                                       Table S-1: Exempt Lawn and Rigid Sign Allowances

(Ord. No. 675, 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012)

Section  4.162.  General Regulations—Livestock and Farm Animals.

(.01)  Under no circumstances shall any livestock animals, farm animals, poultry or fowl be kept for
        commercial purposes in a Residential or Planned Development Zone, except where such animal
        keeping is a legal non-conforming use. The animals listed below shall not be kept on lots having an
        area of less than one acre. The total number of such animals (other than their young under the age
        of six months) allowed on a lot shall be limited to the square footage of the lot divided by the total
        minimum areas required for each animal as listed below.
        A.     One horse or cow: 20,000 square feet.

Supp. No. 3                                                       CD4:350
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.163

      B.      One goat, llama or sheep: 10,000 square feet.

      C.     One swine: 2,000 square feet. (Maximum two swine per individual lot or contiguous lots
             under individual ownership).

      D.     One ostrich: 4,000 square feet.

      E.     One emu: 2,000 square feet.

(.02)  Animal runs or barns, chicken or fowl pens shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any
      residenceotherthantheresidenceof theowner.Swinepensshallbelocatedaminimumof 200feet
      from any residence other than that of the resident owner.

(.03)  Animals, chickens and/or fowl shall be properly caged or housed, and proper sanitation shall be
      maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof
      receptacles.

(.04)  Upon a receipt of a formal complaint by adjacent property owners alleging improper or unsani-
      tarymaintenanceof animalruns,pensorbarn,theDevelopmentReviewBoardshallholdapublic
      hearingandadoptfindingsastothevalidityof saidcomplaint.Basedontheadoptedfindings,the
      Board may impose conditions or restrictions as determined necessary to insure proper mainte-
      nance and sanitation, including prohibition of raising livestock and farm animals on the subject
      site.

(.05)  "Pot-bellied"pigsmaybeconsideredtobeeitherlivestockorhouseholdpets,dependinguponthe
      accommodations provided for them. If such pigs are kept primarily within a dwelling unit, they
      shallbeconsideredtobehouseholdpets,subjecttothesamerulesasthekeepingof dogs.If they
      arekeptprimarilyoutsideof adwellingunit,theyshallbeconsideredtobelivestock,andsubject
      to the provisions listed above.

Section  4.163. General Regulations—Temporary Structures and Uses.

(.01)  The Development Review Board, after hearing as set forth in Section 4.012, may permit the
      temporaryuseof astructureorpremisesinanyzoneforapurposeorusethatdoesnotconformto
      theregulationsprescribedelsewhereinthisCodeforthezoneinwhichitislocated,providedthat
      such use be of a temporary nature and does not involve the erection of a substantial structure. A
      permitforsuchusemaybegrantedintheformof atemporaryandrevocablepermit,uptoafive
      year period, subject to a showing of good cause and such conditions as will safeguard the public
      health,  safety,  convenience  and  general  welfare.  Such  permits  may  be  renewable  upon  re-
      application to the Development Review Board, provided that the Board finds that the renewal is
      not likely to result in a permanent situation.

(.02)  Applications for Temporary Use Permits shall provide:

      A.     A clear description of the proposed temporary structure/use and the reasons why a tempo-
             rary structure/use is necessary at this location for the requested time period.

      B.      A statement of the expected duration of the temporary use/structure, together with docu-
             mentation supporting the proposed date for termination of the temporary use/structure

                                                       CD4:351
§ 4.163                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      C.     A site plan showing the location of the proposed use/structure, access, associated parking,
             pedestrian connections to the greater site if appropriate, lighting, signage and landscaping.

      D.     A plan for removal of the temporary use/structure and restoration of the site to pre-TUP
             conditions or development of the site for approved permanent structures/uses.

(.03)  Factors and considerations for "good cause" include, but are not limited to:

      A.     Availability of appropriately zoned land for the proposed use in the City.

      B.      Availability of and need for the subject property for allowed uses.

      C.     Market conditions, construction costs and other obstructions to the location of the use on
             appropriately zoned land.

      D.     Due diligence of the applicant to site the use on appropriately zoned land,

      E.     Circumstances of the applicant bearing on the need for the temporary use permit.

(.04)  The Planning Director of the City and the Director's staff shall be authorized to issue, without
      public hearing and upon application for Administrative Review pursuant to Section 4.035, a
      temporarypermitforauseof lessthantwoweeksdurationwhichdoesnotinvolvetheerectionof
      asubstantialstructure.Examplesof suchusesarefarmer'smarketsales,Fourthof Julyfireworks
      stands, Christmas tree sales and Boones Ferry Days. For the purposes of this provision, those
      structuresandsignscommonlyassociatedwiththesespecialeventsarenot"substantialstructures."
(Ord. No. 659, 3-16-2009)

Section  4.164. General Regulations—Uses Not Listed.

(.01)  The Planning Director may determine that a proposed use is sufficiently similar to other uses
      permittedinthezonetoallowthatusewithoutspecialreview.Suchdeterminationsmaybemade
      through the Class II Administrative Review procedure listed in Section 4.035, or may be at the
      initiationof theDirector.Ineithercase,writtennotificationof thedecision,includingopportunity
      for appeal, shall be provided to the public as well as to the members of the Development Review
      Board and Planning Commission.

Section  4.166. General Regulations—Unsafe Buildings.

(.01)  Nothing in this Code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
      building or structure declared unsafe by Building Official or City Engineer.

Section  4.167. General Regulations—Access, Ingress and Egress.

(.01)  Each access onto streets or private drives shall be at defined points as approved by the City and
      shall be consistent with the public's health, safety and general welfare. Such defined points of
      accessshallbeapprovedatthetimeof issuanceof abuildingpermitif notpreviouslydetermined
      in the development permit.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

                                                        CD4:352
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.171

Section  4.169. General Regulations—Double-Frontage Lots.

(.01)  Buildings on double frontage lots (i.e., through lots) and corner lots must meet the front yard
      setback for principal buildings on both streets or tracts with a private drive.

(.02)  Giventhatdouble-frontagelotstendtohaveoneendthatisregardedasarearyardbytheowner,
      the Development Review Board may establish special maintenance conditions to apply to such
      areas. Such conditions may include the requirement that the subject homeowners association, if
      any, be responsible for the on-going maintenance of the street frontage areas of double-frontage
      lots.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

Section  4.171. General Regulations—Protection of Natural Features and Other Resources.

(.01)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to prescribe standards and procedures for the use and
      developmentof landtoassuretheprotectionof valuednaturalfeaturesandculturalresources.The
      requirementsof thisSectionareintendedtobeusedinconjunctionwiththoseof theComprehen-
      sive Plan and other zoning standards. It is further the purpose of this Section:

      A.     To protect the natural environmental and scenic features of the City of Wilsonville.

      B.      To encourage site planning and development practices which protect and enhance natural
             features such as riparian corridors, streams, wetlands, swales, ridges, rock outcroppings,
             views, large trees and wooded areas.

      C.     To provide ample open space and to create a constructed environment capable and harmo-
             nious with the natural environment.

(.02)  GeneralTerrainPreparation:

      A.     All developments shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained with maximum
             regard to natural terrain features and topography, especially hillside areas, floodplains, and
             other significant landforms.

      B.      All grading, filling and excavating done in connection with any development shall be in
             accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

      C.     InadditiontoanypermitsrequiredundertheUniformBuildingCode,alldevelopmentsshall
             be planned, designed, constructed and maintained so as to:

             1.      Limittheextentof disturbanceof soilsandsitebygrading,excavationandotherland
                    alterations.
             2.      Avoidsubstantialprobabilitiesof:(l)acceleratederosion;(2)pollution,contamination,
                    orsiltationof lakes,rivers,streamsandwetlands;(3)damagetovegetation;(4)injury
                    to wildlife and fish habitats.

             3.      Minimizetheremovalof treesandothernativevegetationthatstabilizehillsides,retain
                    moisture,reduceerosion,siltationandnutrientrunoff,andpreservethenaturalscenic
                    character.

                                                       CD4:353
§ 4.171                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  Hillsides. All developments proposed on slopes greater than 25 percent shall be limited to the
      extent that:

      A.     AnengineeringgeologicstudyapprovedbytheCity,establishesthatthesiteisstableforthe
             proposed development, and any conditions and recommendations based on the study are
             incorporated into the plans and construction of the development. The study shall include
             items specified under subsection 4.171(.07)A.2.a—j:

      B.      Slope stabilization and re-vegetation plans shall be included as part of  the applicant's
             landscape plans.

      C.     Buildings shall be clustered to reduce alteration of terrain and provide for preservation of
             natural features.

      D.     Creationof buildingsitesthroughmasspadgradingandsuccessivepaddingorterracingof
             building sites shall be avoided where feasible.

      E.     Roads shall be of minimum width, with grades consistent with the City's Public Works
             Standards.

      F.      Maintenance, including re-vegetation, of  all grading areas is the responsibility of  the
             developer,andshalloccurthroughOctober1of thesecondgrowingseasonfollowingreceipt
             of Certificatesof OccupancyunlessalongerperiodisapprovedbytheDevelopmentReview
             Board.

      G.     TheapplicantshallobtainanerosionandsedimentcontrolpermitfromtheCity'sBuilding
             and Environmental Services Division's.

(.04)  TreesandWoodedAreas:

      A.     All developments shall be planned, designed, constructed and maintained so that:
             1.      Existingvegetationisnotdisturbed,injured,orremovedpriortositedevelopmentand
                    prior to an approved plan for circulation, parking and structure location.

             2.      Existingwoodedareas,significantclumps/grovesof treesandvegetation,andalltrees
                    withadiameteratbreastheightof sixinchesorgreatershallbeincorporatedintothe
                    development plan and protected wherever feasible.
             3.      Existing trees are preserved within any right-of-way when such trees are suitably
                    located, healthy, and when approved grading allows.

      B.      Trees and woodland areas to be retained shall be protected during site preparation and
             construction according to City Public Works design specifications, by:

             1.      Avoiding disturbance of the roots by grading and/or compacting activity.
             2.      Providing for drainage and water and air filtration to the roots of trees which will be
                    covered with impermeable surfaces.

             3.      Requiring, if necessary, the advisory expertise of a registered arborist/horticulturist
                    both during and after site preparation.

                                                        CD4:354
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    § 4.171

             4.      Requiring, if necessary, a special maintenance, Management program to insure sur-
                    vival of specific woodland areas of specimen trees or individual heritage status trees.

(.05)  HighVoltagePowerlineEasementsandRight-of-WayandPetroleumPipelineEasements:

      A.     Duetotherestrictionsplacedontheselands,noresidentialstructuresshallbeallowedwithin
             highvoltagepowerlineeasementsandrights-of-wayandpetroleumpipelineeasements,and
             anydevelopment,particularlyresidential,adjacenttohighvoltagepowerlineeasementsand
             rights-of-way and petroleum pipeline easements shall be carefully reviewed.
      B.      Any proposed non-residential development within high voltage powerline easements and
             rights-of-wayandpetroleumpipelineeasementsshallbecoordinatedwithandapprovedby
             the Bonneville Power Administration, Portland General Electric Company or other appro-
             priate utility, depending on the easement or right-of-way ownership.

(.06)  HazardstoSafety:Purpose.
      A.     Toprotectlivesandpropertyfromnaturalorhuman-inducedgeologicorhydrologichazards
             and disasters.

      B.      To protect lives and property from damage due to soil hazards.
      C.     To protect lives and property from forest and brush fires.

      D.     To avoid financial loss resulting from development in hazard areas.

(.07)  StandardsforEarthMovementHazardAreas:

      A.     Nodevelopmentorgradingshallbeallowedinareasof landmovement,slumporearthflow,
             and mud or debris flow, except under one of the following conditions:
             1.      Stabilization of the identified hazardous condition based on established and proven
                    engineeringtechniqueswhichensureprotectionof publicandprivateproperty.Appro-
                    priate conditions of approval may be attached by the City.
             2.      An engineering geologic study approved by the City establishing that the site is stable
                    for the proposed use and development. The study shall include the following:
                    a.      Index map.
                    b.      Project description, to include: location; topography, drainage, vegetation; dis-
                           cussion of previous work; and discussion of field exploration methods.
                    c.      Sitegeology,toinclude:sitegeologicmap;descriptionof bedrockandsuperficial
                           materialsincludingartificialfill;locationof anyfaults,folds,etc.;andstructural
                           data including bedding, jointing, and shear zones.
                    d.      Discussion and analysis of any slope stability problems.
                    e.      Discussionof anyoff-sitegeologicconditionsthatmayposeapotentialhazardto
                           the site or that may be affected by on-site development.
                    f.       Suitability of site for proposed development from geologic standpoint.
                    g.      Specificrecommendationsforcutslopestability,seepageanddrainagecontrol,or
                           other design criteria to mitigate geologic hazards.

                                                       CD4:355
§ 4.171                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    h.      Supportivedata,toinclude:crosssectionsshowingsubsurfacestructure;graphic
                           logs of subsurface explorations; results of laboratory tests; and references.
                    i.       Signature and certification number of  engineering geologist registered in the
                           State of Oregon.
                    j.       Additional information or analyses as necessary to evaluate the site.

      B.      Vegetativecovershallbemaintainedorestablishedforstabilityanderosioncontrolpurposes.

      C.     Diversion of storm water into these areas shall be prohibited.

      D.     The principal source of information for determining earth movement hazards is the State
             Departmentof GeologyandMineralIndustries(DOGAMI)Bulletin99andanysubsequent
             bulletins and accompanying maps. Approved site specific engineering geologic studies shall
             be used to identify the extent and severity of the hazardous conditions on the site, and to
             update the earth movement hazards database.

(.08)  StandardsforSoilHazardAreas:

      A.     Appropriatesitinganddesignsafeguardsshallinsurestructuralstabilityandproperdrainage
             of foundationandcrawlspaceareasfordevelopmentonlandwithanyof thefollowingsoil
             conditions:wetorhighwatertable;highshrink-swellcapability;compressibleororganic;and
             shallow depth-to-bedrock.

      B.      The principal source of information for determining soil hazards is the State DOGAMI
             Bulletin99andanysubsequentbulletinsandaccompanyingmaps.Approvedsite-specificsoil
             studies shall be used to identify the extent and severity of the hazardous conditions on the
             site, and to update the soil hazards database accordingly.

(.09)  HistoricProtection:Purpose.

      A.     Topreservestructures,sites,objects,andareaswithintheCityof Wilsonvillehavinghistoric,
             cultural, or archaeological significance.

      B.      Standards:
             1.      All developments shall be planned, designed, constructed, and maintained to assure
                    protection of any designated historic or cultural resource on or near the site. Restric-
                    tions on development may include:
                    a.      Clustering of buildings and incorporation of historic and/or cultural resources
                           into site design in a manner compatible with the character of such resource.
                    b.      Limitationsonsitepreparationandgradingtoavoiddisturbanceof areaswithin
                           any historic or archaeological sites, monuments or objects of antiquity.
                    c.      Provision of adequate setbacks and buffers between the proposed development
                           and the designated resources.
             2.      TheCitymayattachadditionalconditionswithrespecttothefollowingdesignfactors
                    in protecting the unique character of historic/cultural resources:
                    a.      Architectural compatibility;

                                                        CD4:356
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.171

             b.      Proposed intensity of development;
             c.      Relationship to designated open space;
             d.      Vehicular and pedestrian access; and
             e.      Proposed building or structural mass in relation to the designated resource.
C.    ReviewProcess:
      1.      The Development Review Board shall be the review body for:
             a.      All development which proposes to alter a designated historic, or cultural re-
                    source or resource site; and
             b.      Alldevelopmentwhichproposestousepropertyadjacenttoadesignatedcultural
                    resource; and
             c.      All applications requesting designation of a cultural or historic resource.
      2.      The application shall include the following:
             a.      A complete list of exterior materials, including color of these materials.
             b.      Drawings:
                    i.       Side elevation for each side of any affected structure.
                    ii.      Drawings shall show dimensions or be to scale.
                    iii.     Photographs may be used as a substitute for small projects.
             c.      Plotplansshallbesubmittedfornewstructures,fences,additionsexceeding50`1
                    square feet, or any building relocation.
      3.      Anyimprovementproposedforpropertyadjacenttoadesignated,culturalorhistoric
             resource site, shall be subject to the following provisions:
             a.      Allusesandstructureswhichareincompatiblewiththecharacterof thecultural
                    orhistoricresourceareprohibited.Thecriteriausedtodetermineincompatibility
                    shall include the following:
                    i.       Theintensityandtypeof usewhencomparedwiththehistoricusepatterns
                           of the areas.
                    ii.      The orientation, setback, alignment, spacing and placement of buildings.
                    iii.     The scale, proportions, roof forms, and various architectural features of
                           building design.
             b.      Setbacks may be required which are over and above those required in the base
                    zoneinordertoprotecttheresource.Setbacksshouldbeappropriatetothescale
                    and function of the resource, but allow reasonable use of the adjacent property.
             c.      An appropriate buffer or screen may be required between the new or converting
                    use on the adjacent property and the resource.
      4.      Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or
             repairof anyexteriorarchitecturalfeatureinoronanypropertycoveredbythischapter
             that does not involve a change in design, material or external reconstruction thereof,
             nor does this Code prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,

                                                  CD4:357
§ 4.171                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     demolition or removal of any such feature when the Building Official certifies to the
                     DevelopmentReviewBoardthatsuchactionisrequiredforthepublicsafetyduetoan
                     unsafeordangerousconditionwhichcannotberectifiedthroughtheuseof acceptable
                     building practices.
              5.      The owner, occupant or other person in actual charge of a cultural resource, or an
                     improvement,buildingorstructureinanhistoricdistrictshallkeepingoodrepairallof
                     the exterior portions of such improvement, building or structure, all of the interior
                     portions thereof when subject to control as specified in the designating ordinance or
                     permit, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent
                     deterioration and decay or any exterior architectural feature.

(.10)  AlterationandDevelopmentCriteria.

       A.     Demolitionoralterationof anystructure,oranychangeinanysiteorobjectwhichhasbeen
              designated as a cultural resource, is prohibited unless it is determined:
              1.      In the case of a designated cultural resource, the proposed work would not detrimen-
                     tally alter, destroy or adversely affect any exterior architectural or other identified
                     feature; or
              2.      Inthecaseof anypropertylocatedwithinahistoricdistrict,theproposedconstruction,
                     removal, rehabilitation, alteration, remodeling, excavation or exterior alteration con-
                     forms to any prescriptive standards as adopted by the City, and does not adversely
                     affect the character of the district; or

              3.      Inthecaseof constructionof anewimprovement,buildingorstructureuponacultural
                     resource site, the exterior of such improvements will not adversely affect and will be
                     compatible with the external appearance of existing designated improvements, build-
                     ings and structures on said site; or

              4.      That no reasonable use can be made of the property without such approval.

(.11)  CulturalResourceDesignationCriteria.Aculturalresourcemaybedesignatedandplacedonthe
       Cultural Resources Inventory if it meets the following criteria:

       A.     It exemplifies or reflects special elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political,
              aesthetic, engineering or architectural history; or

       B.      It is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or

       C.     Itembodiesdistinctivecharacteristicsof astyle,type,period,ormethodof construction,or
              it is a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or

       D.     It is representative of the notable work of a builder, designer, or architect.

Section  4.172. Flood Plain Regulations.

(.01)  Purpose:

       A.     To minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood-prone areas.

                                                         CD4:358
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.172

      B.      To regulate uses and alteration of land which would otherwise cause erosion, decreased
             storm water storage capability, increased flood heights or velocities.

      C.     To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
             protectedagainstflooddamageatthetimeof initialconstruction,alterationorremodeling.

      D.     To restrict filling, grading, dredging, and other development which would increase flood
             damage.

      E.     To prevent construction of flood barriers which would unnaturally divert flood waters or
             increase flood hazards in other areas.

      F.      To properly regulate the 100-year flood plain identified by the Federal Insurance Adminis-
             tration(FIA)inthe"FloodInsuranceStudyforClackamasCountyandIncorporatedAreas
             dated effective June 17, 2008l, and displayed on FIA Floodway and Flood Insurance Rate
             Maps dated effective June 17, 2008, which are on file with the City's Community Develop-
             ment Department.

      G.     To implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and to provide standards consistent
             with Wilsonville's adopted Storm Drainage Master Plan.

      H.     ToinsuretheCityanditsresidentsandbusinesses,continuedeligibilityintheNationalFlood
             Insurance Program by complying with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
             Act of l968 and the Flood Disaster Protection Act of l973.

(.02)  GeneralProvisionsAffectingFloodPlains:

      A.     This section shall apply to all flood plain areas in the City of Wilsonville identified by the
             Flood Insurance Rate Map. No Building Permits, Construction Permits, or Development
             Permitsfordevelopmentwithinthefloodplainshallbeissuedexceptincompliancewiththe
             provisions of the Section.

      B.      BasisforEstablishingtheAreasof SpecialFloodHazard.Theareasof specialfloodhazard
             identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report
             entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Clackamas County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,
             effectiveJune17,2008,"withaccompanyingFloodInsuranceRateMaps(effectivedateJune
             17, 2008) is hereby adopted by reference and declared part of this ordinance. The Flood
             InsuranceStudyisonfileattheCityof WilsonvilleCommunityDevelopmentDepartment.

      C.     The City of Wilsonville Community Development Director shall review all Building and
             GradingPermitapplicationsfornewconstructionorsubstantialimprovementtodetermine
             whether proposed building or grading sites will be located in a flood plain. If a proposed
             building or grading site is located within a flood plain, any proposed new construction,
             grading, or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and manufactured housing)
             must:
             1.      Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
                    movement of the structure.
             2.      Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage,

                                                      CD4:359
§ 4.172                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage, and
             4.      Limittheadditionof anyfillmaterialsuchthatthetotalvolumeof fillwithintheflood
                    plaindoesnotexceedthevolumeof materialremovedfromthefloodplaininthesame
                    area.

      D.     ThattheCityof WilsonvillePlanningDirectorshallreviewsubdivisionproposalsandother
             proposed new developments within the flood plain to assure that:
             1.      All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage,
             2.      All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
                    located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
             3.      Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and
             4.      Nonewlotsorparcelsshallbecreatedforthepurposeof increasingthedevelopmentof
                    buildings for human occupancy within the flood plain.

      E.     ThattheCityof WilsonvilleCommunityDevelopmentDirectorshallrequireneworreplace-
             ment water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or
             eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into
             flood waters and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
             impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.

(.03)  DevelopmentPermitRequired:

      A.     A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or development, including
             grading,beginswithinanyareaof specialfloodhazard.ThePermitshallbeforallstructures
             including manufactured homes and for all development including fill and other activities.

      B.      Outright Permitted Uses in the 100-year Flood Plain:
             1.      Agricultural use that is conducted without a structure other than a boundary fence.
             2.      Recreationaluseswhichwouldrequireonlyminorstructuressuchaspicnictablesand
                    barbecues.
             3.      Residential uses that do not contain buildings.
             4.      Underground utility facilities.
             5.      Repair,reconstructionorimprovementof anexistingstructure,thecostof whichisless
                    than 50 percent of the market value of the structure, as determined by the City's
                    Building Official, prior to the improvement or the damage requiring reconstruction,
                    provided no development occurs in the floodway.

(.04)  Useswithinthe100-yearFloodPlainrequiringaFloodPlainPermit:

      A.     Any development except as specified in subsection (.03), above, that is otherwise permitted
             within the Zoning District provided such development is consistent with the Flood Plain
             Standards.

      B.      All subdivisions and land partitions.

                                                        CD4:360
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.172

      C.     Installationof dikestoprovidebuildableorusableproperty,providedthatsaiddikesdonot
             conflict with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this Section.

(.05)  ProhibitedUsesinthe100-yearFloodPlain:

      A.     Any use or building which stores or otherwise maintains hazardous materials, chemicals,
             explosives or any other similar materials.

      B.      Storage of any materials that are not properly anchored, enclosed or protected to prevent
             movement or flotation beyond the property lines.

      C.     CriticalFacility.Constructionof newcriticalfacilitiesshallbe,totheextentpossible,located
             outside the limits of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Con-
             struction of  new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if  no feasible
             alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
             lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher.
             Accesstoandfromthecriticalfacilityshouldalsobeprotectedtotheheightutilizedabove.
             Flood-proofingandsealingmeasuresmustbetakentoensurethattoxicsubstanceswillnot
             be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of
             the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.

(.06)  FloodPlainPermitReviewProcess:

      A.     The Community Development Director the local flood plain administrator and is hereby
             appointed to administer and implement this Section by granting or denying Development
             Permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

      B.      Duties and Responsibilities of the Community Development Director:

             1.      Duties of the Community Development Director shall include, but not be limited to:
                    a.      Review all Development Permits to determine that the permit requirements of
                           this ordinance have been satisfied.
                    b.      Review all Development Permits to determine that all necessary permits have
                           beenobtainedfromthoseFederal,Stateorlocalgovernmentagenciesfromwhich
                           prior approval is required. Notify the State Department of Land Conservation
                           and Development and FEMA of final permit decision.
                    c.      Review all Development Permits to determine if the proposed development is
                           locatedinthefloodway.If locatedinthefloodway,assurethattheencroachment
                           limitations of subsection (.07)(H) are met.

      C.     The Permit process for developments not regulated by Section 4.l40 shall be as follows:

             l.       Pre-application conference with the Planning Department in accordance with the
                    procedures set forth in Section 4.008.

             2.      A complete application in accordance with this Section shall be submitted to the
                    Community Development Director.

                                                       CD4:361
§ 4.172                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Within 30 days of complete application, the Community Development Director shall
                   approve or deny the application based on the following Findings:
                   a.      Reports from the City Engineer and Planning Director as to the applicant's
                          submittaldocuments'compliancewiththisSection,includingrecommendations.
                   b.      The proposed development's compliance with other provisions of the Compre-
                          hensive Plan and Zoning Regulations.

      D.     Thedecisionof theCommunityDevelopmentDirectormaybeappealedtotheDevelopment
             ReviewBoard,uponwrittennoticetotheCityRecorderwithintencalendardaysof thedate
             of final decision. Upon appeal, the Board shall hear the matter in accordance with Section
             4.022

      E.     Any flood plain development proposed for property regulated under Section 4.l40 shall be
             consideredbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardandtheCommunityDevelopmentDirectoras
             part of the Planned Development Permit process.

      F.     Submittalrequirement:.
             1.      Afieldsurveyinrelationtomeansealevelbyalicensedsurveyororcivilengineerof the
                   actual location of the 100-year flood plain, fringe, floodway and the lowest habitable
                   finished floor elevations, including basements, of all existing structures.
             2.      A Site Plan map showing all existing and proposed contours and development and
                   supplementedbyasoilsandhydrologicreportsufficienttodeterminetheneteffectof
                   theproposeddevelopmentonthefloodplainelevationsonthesubjectsiteandadjacent
                   properties. Proposed areas of cut or fill shall be clearly indicated.
             3.      A soils stabilization plan for all cuts, fills and graded areas.

      G.    UseandInterpretationof BaseFloodDataandmaps:
             1.      Whenspecific100-yearfloodplainelevationdatahasnotbeenprovidedinasrequired
                   inthisSection,theCommunityDevelopmentDirectorshallobtain,reviewandreason-
                   ablyutilizeanybasefloodelevationdataavailablefromFederal,Stateorothersources,
                   in order to determine compliance with this Section.
             2.      TheCommunityDevelopmentDirectorshallmakethefinalinterpretationof theexact
                   100-yearfloodplainboundariesontheFIRMandtheFloodwayMap.Appealsshallbe
                   granted consistent with the Standards of the rules and regulations of the National
                   Flood Insurance Program and pursuant to WC 4.172(.08) Appeal Board.

      H.    MonumentationandRecordation:

             1.      Priortoissuanceof aFloodPlainPermit,theCommunityDevelopmentDirectorshall
                   cause the placement of an elevation marker, set at two feet above the 100-year flood
                   elevation,onthesubjectproperty.Themarkershallbeproperlyidentifiedandperma-
                   nently monumented in concrete.
             2.      A Site Plan or map showing the location and elevation of the monument shall be
                   submitted to and maintained on file by the Community Development Director.

                                                      CD4:362
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.172

             3.      Priortoissuanceof anOccupancyPermit,foranystructurewithinthe100-yearflood
                   plain, the Community Development Director shall insure by signature of a licensed
                   surveyor or civil engineer (elevation certificate) that the finished floor elevation of
                   commercial, industrial and public buildings are one and one-half  feet above the
                   100-yearfloodelevationandthatresidentialusesaretwofeetabovethe100-yearflood
                   elevation. The finished floor elevation shall be in relation to mean sea level, of the
                   lowestfloor(includingbasement)of allstructures.Acopyof thefinishedconstruction
                   elevationcertificateforallnewandsubstantiallyimprovedstructuresshallbeprovided
                   to and maintained on file by the Community Development Director.

             4.      For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures where base flood
                   elevationdataisprovidedthroughtheFloodInsuranceStudy,FIRM,orasrequiredin
                   Section 4.172(.06)(G):
                   a.      Verifyandrecordtheactualelevation(inrelationtomeansealevel)towhichthe
                          structure was flood proofed, and
                   b.      MaintainthefloodproofingcertificationsrequiredinSection4.172(.07)(F)(1)(c).

             5.      Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordi-
                   nance.

(.07)  GeneralStandards:

      A.    Anchoringrequirements:

             1.      All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
                   flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

             2.      All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
                   lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize
                   flooddamage.Anchoringmethodsmayinclude,butarenotlimitedto,useof over-the-
                   topof frametiestogroundanchors(ReferenceFEMA's"ManufacturedHomeInstal-
                   lation in Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook for additional techniques).

             3.      All recreational vehicles must either be elevated two feet or more above the 100-year
                   floodelevationandanchoredinaccordancewithparagraph2,above,orbeonthesite
                   for less than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and highway ready. A recre-
                   ationalvehicleisreadyforhighwayuseif itswheelsareinplaceanditisattachedtothe
                   siteonlybyquickdisconnecttypeutilitiesandsecuritydevicesandhasnopermanently
                   attached additions.

      B.    Constructionmaterialsandmethods:

             1.      Allnewconstructionandsubstantialimprovementsshallbeconstructedwithmaterials
                   and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

             2.      All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using meth-
                   ods and practices that minimize flood damage.

                                                      CD4:363
§ 4.172                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other
                    servicefacilitiesshallbedesignedand/orotherwiseelevatedorlocatedsoastoprevent
                    water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
                    flooding.

             4.     Below-gradecrawlspaces:
                    a.      Below-gradecrawlspacesareallowedsubjecttothefollowingstandardsasfound
                          in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings
                          Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:
                          i.       Thebuildingmustbedesignedandadequatelyanchoredtoresistflotation,
                                 collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrody-
                                 namicandhydrostaticloads,includingtheeffectsof buoyancy.Hydrostatic
                                 loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the
                                 required openings stated in Section B below. Because of hydrodynamic
                                 loads,crawlspaceconstructionisnotallowedinareaswithfloodvelocities
                                 greaterthanfivefeetpersecondunlessthedesignisreviewedbyaqualified
                                 designprofessional,suchasaregisteredarchitectorprofessionalengineer.
                                 Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas.
                          ii.      The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE)
                                 and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by
                                 allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each
                                 floodventopeningcanbenomorethanonefootabovethelowestadjacent
                                 exterior grade.
                          iii.     Portionsof thebuildingbelowtheBFEmustbeconstructedwithmaterials
                                 resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of
                                 thecrawlspaceusedtoelevatethebuilding,butalsoanyjoists,insulation,or
                                 othermaterialsthatextendbelowtheBFE.Therecommendedconstruction
                                 practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE.
                          iv.     Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above
                                 BFEordesignedsothatfloodwaterscannotenteroraccumulatewithinthe
                                 systemcomponentsduringfloodconditions.Ductwork,inparticular,must
                                 either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters.
                          v.      The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than
                                 two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
                          vi.     The height of  the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior
                                 gradeof thecrawlspacetothetopof thecrawlspacefoundationwallmust
                                 not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum
                                 allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses
                                 and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.
                          vii.    Theremustbeanadequatedrainagesystemthatremovesfloodwatersfrom
                                 the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained
                                 within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system

                                                      CD4:364
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.172

                          will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics,
                          such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through po-
                          rous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes,
                          drainagetilesorgravelorcrushedstonedrainagebygravityormechanical
                          means.
                    viii.   Thevelocityof floodwatersatthesiteshouldnotexceedfivefeetpersecond
                          for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other
                          foundation types should be used.
             For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01.

C.    Utilities:
      1.      All new replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
             infiltration of flood waters into the system.
      2.      New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
             eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems
             into flood waters.
      3.      On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
             contamination from them during flooding.

D.    Alterationof Watercourses:
      1.      Providedescriptionof theextenttowhichawatercoursewillbealteredorrelocatedas
             a result of proposed development.
      2.      NotifyadjacentcommunitiesandtheFederalEmergencyManagementAgency,Army
             Corpsof Engineers,Departmentof LandConservationandDevelopmentandDepart-
             mentof StateLandspriortoanyalterationorrelocationof awatercourse,andsubmit
             evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
      3.      Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
             watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.

E.    ResidentialConstruction:
      1.      Newconstructionandsubstantialimprovementof anyresidentialstructureshallhave
             the lowest finished floor, including basement, elevated two feet above the 100-year
             flood elevation.
      2.      Fullyenclosedareasbelowthelowestfloorthataresubjecttofloodingareprohibited,
             orshallbedesignedtoautomaticallyequalizehydrostaticfloodforcesonexteriorwalls
             byallowingfortheentryandexitof floodwaters.Designsformeetingthisrequirement
             musteitherbecertifiedbyaregisteredprofessionalengineerorarchitectormustmeet
             or exceed the following minimum criteria:
             a.      A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
                    inchforeverysquarefootof enclosedareasubjecttofloodingshallbeprovided.
             b.      The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

                                                CD4:365
§ 4.172                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    c.      Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices
                           provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood-waters.
             3.      Manufacturedhomesormobilehomestobeplacedorsubstantiallyimprovedshallbe
                    elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
                    home is elevated two feet or more above the base flood elevation and be securely
                    anchoredtoanadequatelydesignedfoundationsystemtoresistflotation,collapseand
                    lateral movement in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.172(.07)(A.(2.).

      F.     NonresidentialConstruction:
             1.      Newconstructionandsubstantialimprovementof anycommercial,industrialorother
                    nonresidentialstructureshalleitherhavethelowestfinishedfloor,includingbasement,
                    elevated one and one-half feet above the 100-year flood elevation; or, together with
                    attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
                    a.      Befloodproofedsothatbelowthebasefloodlevelthestructureiswater-tightwith
                           walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
                    b.      Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
                           loads and effects of buoyancy.
                    c.      Becertifiedbyaregisteredprofessionalengineerorarchitectthatthestandardsof
                           this subsection are satisfied. Floodproofing certifications are required to be
                           provided to the Community Development Director.
                    d.      Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not flood-proofed, must meet the
                           same standards for space below the lowest floor as prescribed for residential
                           construction, above.
                    e.      Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood
                           insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the flood-
                           proofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as
                           one foot below that level).
             2.      Manufacture homes shall meet the requirements of Section 4.172(.07)(E)(3).

      G.    BeforeRegulatoryFloodway.Inareaswherearegulatoryfloodwayhasnotbeendesignated,
             no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall
             bepermittedwithinZoneAEonthecommunity'sFIRM,unlessitisdemonstratedthatthe
             cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
             anticipateddevelopment,willnotincreasethewatersurfaceelevationof thebasefloodmore
             than one foot at any point within the community.

      H.    Floodways:
             1.      Locatedwithinthefloodplainareareasdesignatedasfloodways.Sincethefloodwayis
                    an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
                    potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
                    a.      Encroachments, including fill, new construction, or substantial improvements,
                           and other development shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered

                                                        CD4:366
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.172

                            professional civil engineer is provided, demonstrating through hydrologic and
                            hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
                            that encroachments shall not result in any increase flood levels during the
                            occurrence of the base flood discharge.
                     b.      All development shall comply with all applicable flood plain standards of Section
                            4.172.
                     c.      All buildings designed for human habitation and/or occupancy shall be prohib-
                            ited within the floodway.

       I.      Parking Lots and Storage Areas:

              1.      All parking lots and storage areas below the flood plain elevation shall be paved.

              2.      A minimum of 25 percent of the provided parking spaces must be provided above the
                     100-year flood plain elevation for all non-residential uses.

              3.      Residential uses providing one or more parking spaces per unit shall provide at least
                     one parking space per unit above the 100-year flood plain elevation.

       J.       Subdivision Proposals:

              1.      All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

              2.      All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
                     electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
                     damage.

              3.      All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
                     flood damage, and

              4.      Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another
                     authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
                     developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

       K.     Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the Flood
              Insurance Study or from another authoritative source, applications for Building Permits shall
              be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The
              test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water
              marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet
              above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

(.08)  Appeal Board:

       A.     The Development Review Board as established by the City of Wilsonville shall hear and
              decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.

       B.      The Development Review Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
              error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development
              Director in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:367
§ 4.172                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       C.     Those aggrieved by the decision of the Development Review Board may appeal such decision
              to the City Council.

       D.     In acting upon such applications, the Development Review Board shall consider all technical
              evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and
              1.      the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
              2.      the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
              3.      the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
                     effect of such damage on the individual owner;
              4.      the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
              5.      the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
              6.      the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to
                     flooding or erosion damage;
              7.      the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
              8.      the relationship of  the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain
                     management program for that area;
              9.      the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
                     vehicles;
              10.    the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
                     waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
              11.    the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, includ-
                     ing maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas electrical
                     and water systems, and streets and bridges.

       E.     Upon consideration of the factors of Sections 4.035, 4.184, and 4.196 and the purposes of
              this ordinance, the Development Review Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
              permits as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance and to protect lives or
              property.
       F.      The Community Development Director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
              report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

(.09)  Conflicts. If any provisions of Section 4.172 conflict with any other Sections of this Code, the most
       restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. No. 3l6, 7-6-1987; Ord. No. 647, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 686, 11-1-2010; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A),
8-4-2025)

Section  4.175.  Public Safety and Crime Prevention.

(.01)  All developments shall be designed to deter crime and insure public safety.

(.02)  Addressing and directional signing shall be designed to assure identification of all buildings and
       structures by emergency response personnel, as well as the general public.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:368
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.175

(.03)  Areas vulnerable to crime shall be designed to allow surveillance. Parking and loading areas shall
      be designed for access by police in the course of routine patrol duties.

(.04)  Exterior lighting shall be designed and oriented to discourage crime.

Supp. No. 6                                            CD4:368.1

                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.176

Section  4.176. Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering.

Note:ThereaderisencouragedtoseeSection4.179,applyingtoscreeningandbufferingofstorageareasfor
solidwasteandrecyclables.

(.01)  Purpose. This Section consists of landscaping and screening standards and regulations for use
      throughouttheCity.Theregulationsaddressmaterials,placement,layout,andtimingof installa-
      tion.TheCityrecognizestheecologicalandeconomicvalueof landscapingandrequirestheuseof
      landscaping and other screening or buffering to:
      A.     Promote the re-establishment of  vegetation for aesthetic, health, erosion control, flood
             control and wildlife habitat reasons;

      B.      Restore native plant communities and conserve irrigation water through establishment, or
             re-establishment, of native, drought-tolerant plants;
      C.     Mitigate for loss of native vegetation;
      D.     Establish and enhance a pleasant visual character which recognizes aesthetics and safety
             issues;
      E.     Promotecompatibilitybetweenlandusesbyreducingthevisual,noise,andlightingimpacts
             of specific development on users of the site and abutting sites or uses;
      F.      Unify development and enhance and define public and private spaces;

      G.     Promote the retention and use of existing topsoil and vegetation. Amended soils benefit
             stormwater retention and promote infiltration;
      H.     Aidinenergyconservationbyprovidingshadefromthesunandshelterfromthewind;and

      I.      Screen from public view the storage of  materials that would otherwise be considered
             unsightly.
      J.       Support crime prevention, create proper sight distance clearance, and establish other safety
             factors by effective landscaping and screening.

      K.     Provide landscaping materials that minimize the need for excessive use of fertilizers, herbi-
             cides and pesticides, irrigation, pruning, and mowing to conserve and protect natural
             resources, wildlife habitats, and watersheds.

(.02)  LandscapingandScreeningStandards:
      A.     Subsections"C"through"I,"below,statethedifferentlandscapingandscreeningstandards
             to be applied throughout the City. The locations where the landscaping and screening are
             required and the depth of the landscaping and screening is stated in various places in the
             Code.

      B.      AlllandscapingandscreeningrequiredbythisCodemustcomplywithallof theprovisions
             of thisSection,unlessspecificallywaivedorgrantedaVarianceasotherwiseprovidedinthe
             Code. The landscaping standards are minimum requirements; higher standards can be
             substitutedaslongasfenceandvegetation-heightlimitationsaremet.Wherethestandards
             set a minimum based on square footage or linear footage, they shall be interpreted as

                                                       CD4:369
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             applying to each complete or partial increment of area or length (e.g., a landscaped area of
             between 800 and 1,600 square feet shall have two trees if the standard calls for one tree per
             800 square feet.

      C.    GeneralLandscapingStandard:

             1.     Intent.TheGeneralLandscapingStandardisalandscapetreatmentforareasthatare
                   generally open. It is intended to be applied in situations where distance is used as the
                   principal means of separating uses or developments and landscaping is required to
                   enhance the intervening space. Landscaping may include a mixture of ground cover,
                   evergreen and deciduous shrubs, and coniferous and deciduous trees.

             2.     Requiredmaterials.Shrubsandtrees,otherthanstreettrees,maybegrouped.Ground
                   cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area (see Figure 21:
                   GeneralLandscaping).TheGeneralLandscapingStandardhastwodifferentrequire-
                   ments for trees and shrubs:
                   a.      Wherethelandscapedareaislessthan30feetdeep,onetreeisrequiredforevery
                          30 linear feet.
                   b.      Wherethelandscapedareais30feetdeeporgreater,onetreeisrequiredforevery
                          800squarefeetandtwohighshrubsorthreelowshrubsarerequiredforevery400
                          square feet.

      D.    LowScreenLandscapingStandard:

             1.     Intent. The Low Screen Landscaping Standard is a landscape treatment that uses a
                   combination of distance and low screening to separate uses or developments. It is
                   intended to be applied in situations where low screening is adequate to soften the
                   impactof oneuseordevelopmentonanother,orwherevisibilitybetweenareasismore
                   importantthanatotalvisualscreen.TheLowScreenLandscapingStandardisusually
                   applied along street lot lines or in the area separating parking lots from street rights-
                   of-way.

             2.     Required materials. The Low Screen Landscaping Standard requires sufficient low
                   shrubstoformacontinuousscreenthreefeethighand95percentopaque,year-round.
                   In addition, one tree is required for every 30 linear feet of landscaped area, or as
                   otherwise required to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped area. Ground cover
                   plants must fully cover the remainder of  the landscaped area. A three foot high
                   masonry wall or a berm may be substituted for the shrubs, but the trees and ground
                   coverplantsarestillrequired.Whenappliedalongstreetlotlines,thescreenorwallis
                   tobeplacedalongtheinteriorsideof thelandscapedarea.(SeeFigure22:LowScreen
                   Landscaping).

      E.    LowBermLandscapingStandard:

             1.     Intent.TheLowBermStandardisintendedtobeappliedinsituationswheremoderate
                   screeningtoreducebothvisualandnoiseimpactsisneededtoprotectabuttingusesor
                   developments from one-another, and where it is desirable and practical to provide

                                                      CD4:370
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.176

             separation by both distance and sight-obscuring materials. This screening is most
             importantwhereeither,orboth,of theabuttingusesordevelopmentscanbeexpected
             to be particularly sensitive to noise or visual impacts.

      2.     Requiredmaterials.TheLowBermStandardrequiresabermatleasttwofeetsixinches
             high along the interior side of the landscaped area (see Figure 23: Low Berm Land-
             scaping). If the berm is less than three feet high, low shrubs meeting the Low Screen
             Landscaping Standard, above, are to be planted along the top of the berm, assuring
             thatthescreenisatleastthreefeetinheight.Inaddition,onetreeisrequiredforevery
             30 linear feet of berm, or as otherwise required to provide a tree canopy over the
             landscapedarea.Groundcoverplantsmustfullycovertheremainderof thelandscaped
             area.

F.     HighScreenLandscapingStandard:

      1.     Intent. The High Screen Landscaping Standard is a landscape treatment that relies
             primarilyonscreeningtoseparateusesordevelopments.Itisintendedtobeappliedin
             situations where visual separation is required.

      2.     Required materials. The High Screen Landscaping Standard requires sufficient high
             shrubs to form a continuous screen at least six feet high and 95 percent opaque,
             year-round.Inaddition,onetreeisrequiredforevery30linearfeetof landscapedarea,
             or as otherwise required to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped area. Ground
             cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area. A six foot high
             masonry wall or a berm may be substituted for the shrubs, but the trees and ground
             coverplantsarestillrequired.Whenappliedalongstreetlotlines,thescreenorwallis
             tobeplacedalongtheinteriorsideof thelandscapedarea.(SeeFigure24:HighScreen
             Landscaping).

G.    HighWallStandard:

      1.     Intent.TheHighWallStandardisintendedtobeappliedinsituationswhereextensive
             screeningtoreducebothvisualandnoiseimpactsisneededtoprotectabuttingusesor
             developments from one-another. This screening is most important where either, or
             both,of theabuttingusesordevelopmentscanbeexpectedtobeparticularlysensitive
             to noise or visual impacts, or where there is little space for physical separation.

      2.     Requiredmaterials. The High Wall Standard requires a masonry wall at least six feet
             high along the interior side of the landscaped area (see Figure 25: High Wall Land-
             scaping).Inaddition,onetreeisrequiredforevery30linearfeetof wall,orasotherwise
             requiredtoprovideatreecanopyoverthelandscapedarea.Groundcoverplantsmust
             fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.

H.    HighBermStandard:

      1.     Intent.TheHighBermStandardisintendedtobeappliedinsituationswhereextensive
             screeningtoreducebothvisualandnoiseimpactsisneededtoprotectabuttingusesor
             developments from one-another, and where it is desirable and practical to provide

                                               CD4:371
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    separation by both distance and sight-obscuring materials. This screening is most
                    importantwhereeither,orboth,of theabuttingusesordevelopmentscanbeexpected
                    to be particularly sensitive to noise or visual impacts.
             2.     Required materials. The High Berm Standard requires a berm at least four feet high
                    alongtheinteriorsideof thelandscapedarea(seeFigure26:HighBermLandscaping).
                    If thebermislessthansixfeethigh,lowshrubsmeetingtheLowScreenLandscaping
                    Standard,above,aretobeplantedalongthetopof theberm,assuringthatthescreen
                    is at least six feet in height In addition, one tree is required for every 30 linear feet of
                    berm, or as otherwise required to provide a tree canopy over the landscaped area.
                    Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.

      I.     PartiallySight-ObscuringFenceStandard:

             1.     Intent.ThePartiallySight-ObscuringFenceStandardisintendedtoprovideatall,but
                    not totally blocked, visual separation. The standard is applied where a low level of
                    screeningisadequatetosoftentheimpactof oneuseordevelopmentonanother,and
                    where some visibility between abutting areas is preferred over a total visual screen. It
                    can be applied in conjunction with landscape plantings or applied in areas where
                    landscape plantings are not necessary and where nonresidential uses are involved.

             2.     Requiredmaterials.PartiallySight-ObscuringFenceStandardaretobeatleastsixfeet
                    highandatleast50percentsight-obscuring.Fencesmaybemadeof wood(otherthan
                    plywoodorparticle-board),metal,bricks,masonryorotherpermanentmaterials(see
                    Figure 27: Partially Sight-Obscuring Fence).

      J.     FullySight-ObscuringFenceStandard:
             1.     Intent. The Fully Sight-Obscuring Fence Standard is intended to provide a totally
                    blockedvisualseparation.Thestandardisappliedwherefullvisualscreeningisneeded
                    to reduce the impact of one use or development on another. It can be applied in
                    conjunctionwithlandscapeplantingsorappliedinareaswherelandscapeplantingsare
                    not necessary.
             2.     Requiredmaterials.Fullysight-obscuringfencesaretobeatleastsixfeethighand100
                    percentsight-obscuring.Fencesmaybemadeof wood(otherthanplywoodorparticle-
                    board), metal, bricks, masonry or other permanent materials (see Figure 28: Totally
                    Sight-Obscuring Fence).

(.03)  LandscapeArea.Notlessthan15percent)of thetotallotarea,shallbelandscapedwithvegetative
      plant materials. The ten percent parking area landscaping required by section 4.155.03(B)(1) is
      included in the 15 percent total lot landscaping requirement. Landscaping shall be located in at
      leastthreeseparateanddistinctareasof thelot,oneof whichmustbeinthecontiguousfrontage
      area. Planting areas shall be encouraged adjacent to structures. Landscaping shall be used to
      define, soften or screen the appearance of buildings and off-street parking areas. Materials to be
      installed shall achieve a balance between various plant forms, textures, and heights. The installa-
      tion of native plant materials shall be used whenever practicable. (For recommendations refer to
      the Native Plant List maintained by the City of Wilsonville).

                                                      CD4:372
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.176

(.04)  Buffering and Screening. Additional to the standards of this subsection, the requirements of the
       Section 4.137.5 (Screening and Buffering Overlay Zone) shall also be applied, where applicable.

       A.     All intensive or higher density developments shall be screened and buffered from less intense
              or lower density developments.

       B.      Activity areas on commercial and industrial sites shall be buffered and screened from
              adjacent residential areas.

       C.     All exterior, roof and ground mounted, mechanical and utility equipment shall be screened
              from ground level off-site view from adjacent streets or properties.

       D.     All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public view, unless visible storage has been
              approved for the site by the Development Review Board or Planning Director acting on a
              development permit.

       E.     In all cases other than for industrial uses in industrial zones, landscaping shall be designed to
              screen loading areas and docks, and truck parking.

       F.      In any zone any fence over six feet high measured from soil surface at the outside of fenceline
              shall require Development Review Board approval.

(.05)  Sight-Obscuring Fence or Planting. The use for which a sight-obscuring fence or planting is
       required shall not begin operation until the fence or planting is erected or in place and approved by
       the City. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued upon a posting of a bond or other security
       equal to 110 percent of the cost of such fence or planting and its installation. (See Sections 4.400
       to 4.470 for additional requirements.)

(.06)  Plant Materials:

       A.     Shrubs and Ground Cover. All required ground cover plants and shrubs must be of sufficient
              size and number to meet these standards within three years of planting. Non-horticultural
              plastic sheeting or other impermeable surface shall not be placed under mulch. Native topsoil
              shall be preserved and reused to the extent feasible. Surface mulch or bark dust are to be fully
              raked into soil of appropriate depth, sufficient to control erosion, and are confined to areas
              around plantings. Areas exhibiting only surface mulch, compost or barkdust are not to be
              used as substitutes for plant areas.
              1.      Shrubs. All shrubs shall be well branched and typical of their type as described in
                     current AAN Standards and shall be equal to or better than 2-gallon containers and ten
                     inches to 12 inches spread.

              2.      Ground cover. Shall be equal to or better than the following depending on the type of
                     plant materials used: gallon containers spaced at four feet on center minimum, four
                     inch pot spaced two feet on center minimum, two one-fourth inch pots spaced at 18 inch
                     on center minimum. No bare root planting shall be permitted. Ground cover shall be
                     sufficient to cover at least 80 percent of the bare soil in required landscape areas within
                     three years of planting. Where wildflower seeds are designated for use as a ground
                     cover, the City may require annual re-seeding as necessary.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:373
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              3.      Turf or lawn in non-residential developments. Shall not be used to cover more than ten
                     percent of the landscaped area, unless specifically approved based on a finding that,
                     due to site conditions and availability of water, a larger percentage of turf or lawn area
                     is appropriate. Use of lawn fertilizer shall be discouraged. Irrigation drainage runoff
                     from lawns shall be retained within lawn areas.
              4.      Plant materials under trees or large shrubs. Appropriate plant materials shall be
                     installed beneath the canopies of trees and large shrubs to avoid the appearance of bare
                     ground in those locations.
              5.      Integrate compost-amended topsoil in all areas to be landscaped, including lawns, to
                     help detain runoff, reduce irrigation and fertilizer needs, and create a sustainable,
                     low-maintenance landscape.

       B.      Trees. All trees shall be well-branched and typical of their type as described in current
              American Association of Nurserymen (AAN) Standards and shall be balled and burlapped.
              The trees shall be grouped as follows:
              1.      Primary trees which define, outline or enclose major spaces, such as Oak, Maple,
                     Linden, and Seedless Ash, shall be a minimum of two inch caliper.

              2.      Secondary trees which define, outline or enclose interior areas, such as Columnar Red
                     Maple, Flowering Pear, Flame Ash, and Honeylocust, shall be a minimum of 1¾ inch
                     to 2 inch caliper.
              3.      Accent trees which, are used to add color, variation and accent to architectural features,
                     such as Flowering Pear and Kousa Dogwood, shall be 1¾ inch minimum caliper.

              4.      Large conifer trees such as Douglas Fir or Deodar Cedar shall be installed at a
                     minimum height of eight feet.

              5.      Medium-sized conifers such as Shore Pine, Western Red Cedar or Mountain Hemlock
                     shall be installed at a minimum height of five to six feet.

       C.     Where a proposed development includes buildings larger than 24 feet in height or greater
              than 50,000 square feet in footprint area, the Planning Director or the Development Review
              Board, as applicable, may require larger or more mature plant materials.
              1.      At maturity, proposed trees shall be at least one-half the height of the building to which
                     they are closest, and building walls longer than 50 feet shall require tree groups located
                     no more than 50 feet on center, to break up the length and height of the façade.
              2.      Either fully branched deciduous or evergreen trees may be specified depending upon
                     the desired results. Where solar access is to be preserved, only solar-friendly deciduous
                     trees are to be used. Where year-round sight obscuring is the highest priority, evergreen
                     trees are to be used.

              3.      The following standards are to be applied:
                     a.      Deciduous trees:
                            i.       Minimum height of ten feet; and

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:374
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.176

                            ii.      Minimum trunk diameter (caliper) of two inches (measured at four and
                                   one-half feet above grade).
                     b.      Evergreen trees: Minimum height of 12 feet.

       D.     Street Trees. In order to provide a diversity of species, the Development Review Board may
              require a mix of  street trees throughout a development. Unless the Board waives the
              requirement for reasons supported by a finding in the record, different types of street trees
              shall be required for adjoining blocks in a development.

              1.      All trees shall be standard base grafted, well branched and typical of their type as
                     described in current AAN Standards and shall be balled and burlapped (b&b). Street
                     trees shall be planted at sizes in accordance with the following standards:
                     a.      Arterial streets—Three inches minimum caliper
                     b.      Collector streets—Two inches minimum caliper.
                     c.      Local streets or residential private access drives—1¾ inches minimum caliper.
                     d.      Accent or median tree—1¾ inches minimum caliper.

              2.      The following trees and varieties thereof are considered satisfactory street trees in most
                     circumstances; however, other varieties and species are encouraged and will be consid-
                     ered:
                     a.      Trees over 50 feet mature height: Quercus garryana (Native Oregon White Oak),
                            Quercus rubra borealis (Red Oak), Acer Macrophylum (Native Big Leaf Maple),
                            Acer nigrum (Green Column Black Maple), Fraxinus americanus (White Ash),
                            Fraxinus pennsylvannica 'Marshall' (Marshall Seedless Green Ash), Quercus
                            coccinea (Scarlet Oak), Quercus pulustris (PinOak), Tilia americana (American
                            Linden).
                     b.      Trees under 50 feet mature height: Acer rubrum (Red Sunset Maple), Cornus
                            nuttallii (NativePacific Dogwood), Gleditsia triacanthos (Honey Locust), Pyrus
                            calleryana 'Bradford' (Bradford Pear), Tilia cordata (Lit tle Leaf Linden), Fraxinus
                            oxycarpa (Flame Ash).
                     c.      Other street tree species. Other species may be specified for use in certain
                            situations. For instance, evergreen species may be specified where year-round
                            color is desirable and no adverse effect on solar access is anticipated. Water-loving
                            species may be specified in low locations where wet soil conditions are antici-
                            pated.

       E.     Types of Plant Species:

              1.      Existing landscaping or native vegetation may be used to meet these standards, if
                     protected and maintained during the construction phase of the development and if the
                     plant species do not include any that have been listed by the City as prohibited. The
                     existing native and non-native vegetation to be incorporated into the landscaping shall
                     be identified.

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:375
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              2.      Selection of plant materials. Landscape materials shall be selected and sited to produce
                     hardy and drought-tolerant landscaping. Selection shall be based on soil characteris-
                     tics, maintenance requirements, exposure to sun and wind, slope and contours of the
                     site, and compatibility with other vegetation that will remain on the site. Suggested
                     species lists for street trees, shrubs and groundcovers shall be provided by the City of
                     Wilsonville.
              3.      Prohibited plant materials. The City may establish a list of plants that are prohibited in
                     landscaped areas. Plants may be prohibited because they are potentially damaging to
                     sidewalks, roads, underground utilities, drainage improvements, or foundations, or
                     because they are known to be invasive to native vegetation.
       F.      Tree Credit. Existing trees that are in good health as certified by an arborist and are not
              disturbed during construction may count for landscaping tree credit as follows (measured at
              four and one-half feet above grade and rounded to the nearest inch):

                                 Existing trunk diameter                                Number of Tree Credits

                         18 to 24 inches in diameter                          3 tree credits
                         25 to 31 inches in diameter                          4 tree credits
                         32 inches or greater                                      5 tree credits

              1.      It shall be the responsibility of the owner to use reasonable care to maintain preserved
                     trees. Trees preserved under this section may only be removed if an application for
                     removal permit under Section 4.610.10(01)(H) has been approved. Required mitigation
                     for removal shall be replacement with the number of trees credited to the preserved and
                     removed tree.
              2.      Within five years of occupancy and upon notice from the City, the property owner shall
                     replace any preserved tree that cannot be maintained due to disease or damage, or
                     hazard or nuisance as defined in Chapter 6 of this Code. The notice shall be based on
                     complete information provided by an arborist Replacement with the number of trees
                     credited shall occur within one growing season of notice.
       G.     Exceeding Standards. Landscape materials that exceed the minimum standards of  this
              Section are encouraged, provided that height and vision clearance requirements are met.
       H.     Compliance with Standards. The burden of proof is on the applicant to show that proposed
              landscaping materials will comply with the purposes and standards of this Section.

(.07)  Installation and Maintenance:

       A.     Installation. Plant materials shall be installed to current industry standards and shall be
              properly staked to assure survival. Support devices (guy wires, etc.) shall not be allowed to
              interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular movement.
       B.      Maintenance. Maintenance of landscaped areas is the on-going responsibility of the property
              owner. Any landscaping installed to meet the requirements of this Code, or any condition of
              approval established by a City decision-making body acting on an application, shall be
              continuously maintained in a healthy, vital and acceptable manner. Plants that die are to be

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:376
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.176

              replaced in kind, within one growing season, unless appropriate substitute species are
              approved by the City. Failure to maintain landscaping as required in this Section shall
              constitute a violation of  this Code for which appropriate legal remedies, including the
              revocation of any applicable land development permits, may result.

       C.     Irrigation. The intent of  this standard is to assure that plants will survive the critical
              establishment period when they are most vulnerable due to a lack of watering and also to
              assure that water is not wasted through unnecessary or inefficient irrigation. Approved
              irrigation system plans shall specify one of the following:

              1.      A permanent, built-in, irrigation system with an automatic controller. Either a spray or
                     drip irrigation system, or a combination of the two, may be specified.

              2.      A permanent or temporary system designed by a landscape architect licensed to
                     practice in the State of  Oregon, sufficient to assure that the plants will become
                     established and drought-tolerant.

              3.      Other irrigation system specified by a licensed professional in the field of landscape
                     architecture or irrigation system design.

              4.      A temporary permit issued for a period of one year, after which an inspection shall be
                     conducted to assure that the plants have become established. Any plants that have died,
                     or that appear to the Planning Director to not be thriving, shall be appropriately
                     replaced within one growing season. An inspection fee and a maintenance bond or
                     other security sufficient to cover all costs of replacing the plant materials shall be
                     provided, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director. Additionally,
                     the applicant shall provide the City with a written license or easement to enter the
                     property and cause any failing plant materials to be replaced.

       D.     Protection. All required landscape areas, including all trees and shrubs, shall be protected
              from potential damage by conflicting uses or activities including vehicle parking and the
              storage of materials.

(.08)  Landscaping on Corner Lots. All landscaping on corner lots shall meet the vision clearance
       standards of Section 4.177. If high screening would ordinarily be required by this Code, low
       screening shall be substituted within vision clearance areas. Taller screening may be required
       outside of the vision clearance area to mitigate for the reduced height within it.

(.09)  Landscape Plans. Landscape plans shall be submitted showing all existing and proposed landscape
       areas. Plans must be drawn to scale and show the type, installation size, number and placement of
       materials. Plans shall include a plant material list. Plants are to be identified by both their scientific
       and common names. The condition of any existing plants and the proposed method of irrigation
       are also to be indicated. Landscape plans shall divide all landscape areas into the following
       categories based on projected water consumption for irrigation:

       A.     High water usage areas (± two inches per week): small convoluted lawns, lawns under existing
              trees, annual and perennial flower beds, and temperamental shrubs;

Supp. No. 5                                              CD4:377
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       B.      Moderate water usage areas (± one inch per week): large lawn areas, average water-using
              shrubs, and trees;
       C.     Low water usage areas (Less than one inch per week, or gallons per hour): seeded fieldgrass,
              swales, native plantings, drought-tolerant shrubs, and ornamental grasses or drip irrigated
              areas.
       D.     Interim or unique water usage areas: areas with temporary seeding, aquatic plants, erosion
              control areas, areas with temporary irrigation systems, and areas with special water-saving
              features or water harvesting irrigation capabilities.
              These categories shall be noted in general on the plan and on the plant material list.

(.10)  Completion of Landscaping. The installation of plant materials may be deferred for a period of
       time specified by the Board or Planning Director acting on an application, in order to avoid hot
       summer or cold winter periods, or in response to water shortages. In these cases, a temporary
       permit shall be issued, following the same procedures specified in subsection (.07)(C)(3), above,
       regarding temporary irrigation systems. No final Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted until
       an adequate bond or other security is posted for the completion of the landscaping, and the City is
       given written authorization to enter the property and install the required landscaping, in the event
       that the required landscaping has not been installed. The form of such written authorization shall
       be submitted to the City Attorney for review.

(.11)  Street Trees Not Typically Part of Site Landscaping. Street trees are not subject to the requirements
       of this Section and are not counted toward the required standards of this Section. Except, however,
       that the Development Review Board may, by granting a waiver or variance, allow for special
       landscaping within the right-of-way to compensate for a lack of appropriate on-site locations for
       landscaping. See subsection (.06), above, regarding street trees.

(.12)  Mitigation and Restoration Plantings. A mitigation plan is to be approved by the City's Develop-
       ment Review Board before the destruction, damage, or removal of any existing native plants.
       Plantings intended to mitigate the loss of native vegetation are subject to the following standards.
       Where these standards conflict with other requirements of this Code, the standards of this Section
       shall take precedence. The desired effect of this section is to preserve existing native vegetation.
       A.     Plant Sources. Plant materials are to be native and are subject to approval by the City. They
              are to be non-clonal in origin; seed source is to be as local as possible, and plants must be
              nursery propagated or taken from a pre-approved transplantation area. All of these require-
              ments are to be addressed in any proposed mitigation plan.
       B.      Plant Materials. The mitigation plan shall specify the types and installation sizes of plant
              materials to be used for restoration. Practices such as the use of pesticides, fungicides, and
              fertilizers shall not be employed in mitigation areas unless specifically authorized and
              approved.
       C.     Installation. Install native plants in suitable soil conditions. Plant materials are to be sup-
              ported only when necessary because of extreme winds at the site. Where support is necessary,
              all stakes, guy wires or other measures are to be removed as soon as the plants can support
              themselves. Protect from animal and fowl predation and foraging until establishment.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:378
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.176

       D.     Irrigation. Permanent irrigation systems are generally not appropriate in restoration situa-
              tions, and manual or temporary watering of new plantings is often necessary. The mitigation
              plan shall specify the method and frequency of manual watering, including any that may be
              necessary after the first growing season.

       E.     Monitoring and Reporting. Monitoring of native landscape areas is the on-going responsibil-
              ity of the property owner. Plants that die are to be replaced in kind and quantity within one
              year. Written proof of the survival of all plants shall be required to be submitted to the City's
              Planning Department one year after the planting is completed.

                                             Figure 21: General Landscaping

                                           Figure 22: Low Screen Landscaping

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:379
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                             Figure 23: Low Berm Landscaping

                                             Figure 24: High Screen Landscaping

Supp. No. 5                                                  CD4:380
                             PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                            § 4.176

                                    Figure 25: High Wall Landscaping

                                      Figure 26: High Berm Landscaping

Supp. No. 5                                       CD4:381
§ 4.176                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                                        Figure 27: Partially Sight-Obscuring Fence

                                          Figure 28: Totally Sight-Obscuring Fence

Supp. No. 5                                                   CD4:382
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                    4.176

[Figure C-7 General Landscaping
Figure C-8 Low Screen Landscaping are not shown here and can be obtained by contacting Linda
Straessle, Planning Secretary at (503) 682-4960 or e-mail your request to straessle@ci.wilsonville.or.us.]
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018;
Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Supp. No. 5                                           CD4:383
§ 4.177                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.177.  Street Improvement Standards.

This section contains the City's requirements and standards for pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facility
improvements to public streets, or within public easements. The purpose of this section is to ensure that
development, including redevelopment, provides transportation facilities that are safe, convenient, and
adequate in rough proportion to their impacts.
       (.01)  Development and related public facility improvements shall comply with the standards in
              this section, the Wilsonville Public Works Standards, and the Transportation System Plan, in
              rough proportion to the potential impacts of the development. Such improvements shall be
              constructed at the time of development or as provided by Section 4.140, except as modified
              or waived by the City Engineer for reasons of safety or traffic operations.
       (.02)  Street Design Standards:
              A.     All street improvements and intersections shall provide for the continuation of streets
                     through specific developments to adjoining properties or subdivisions.
                     1.      Development shall be required to provide existing or future connections to
                            adjacent sites through the use of access easements where applicable. Such ease-
                            ments shall be required in addition to required public street dedications as
                            required in Section 4.236(.04).
              B.      The City Engineer shall make the final determination regarding right-of-way and street
                     element widths using the ranges provided in Chapter 3 of the Transportation System
                     Plan and the additional street design standards in the Public Works Standards.
              C.     Rights-of-way:
                     1.      Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy Building permits or as a part of
                            the recordation of a final plat, the City shall require dedication of rights-of-way
                            in accordance with the Transportation System Plan. All dedications shall be
                            recorded with the County Assessor's Office.
                     2.      The City shall also require a waiver of remonstrance against formation of a local
                            improvement district, and all non-remonstrances shall be recorded in the County
                            Recorder's Office as well as the City's Lien Docket, prior to issuance of  a
                            Certificate of Occupancy Building Permit or as a part of the recordation of a
                            final plat.
                     3.      In order to allow for potential future widening, a special setback requirement
                            shall be maintained adjacent to all arterial streets. The minimum setback shall be
                            55 feet from the centerline or 25 feet from the right-of-way designated on the
                            Master Plan, whichever is greater.
              D.     Dead-end Streets. New dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall not exceed 200 feet in
                     length, unless the adjoining land contains barriers such as existing buildings, railroads
                     or freeways, or environmental constraints such as steep slopes, or major streams or
                     rivers, that prevent future street extension and connection. A central landscaped island
                     with rainwater management and infiltration are encouraged in cul-de-sac design. No
                     more than 25 dwelling units shall take access to a new dead-end or cul-de-sac street

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:384
                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.177

      unlessitisdeterminedthatthetrafficimpactsonadjacentstreetswillnotexceedthose
      fromadevelopmentof 25orfewerunits.Allotherdimensionalstandardsof dead-end
      streetsshallbegovernedbythePublicWorksStandards.Notificationthatthestreetis
      planned for future extension shall be posted on the dead-end street.
E.    Cornerorclearvisionarea:
      1.      AclearvisionareawhichmeetsthePublicWorksStandardsshallbemaintained
             on each corner of property at the intersection of any two streets, a street and a
             railroadorastreetandadriveway.However,thefollowingitemsshallbeexempt
             from meeting this requirement:
             a.      Light and utility poles with a diameter less than 12 inches.
             b.      Treeslessthansixinchd.b.h.,approvedasapartof theStageIISiteDesign,
                   or administrative review.
             c.      Except as allowed by b., above, an existing tree, trimmed to the trunk, ten
                   feet above the curb.
             d.      Official warning or street sign.
             e.      Naturalcontourswherethenaturalelevationsaresuchthattherecanbeno
                   cross-visibilityattheintersectionandnecessaryexcavationwouldresultin
                   anunreasonablehardshiponthepropertyownerordeterioratethequality
                   of the site.
F.     Verticalclearance.Aminimumclearanceof 12feetabovethepavementsurfaceshallbe
      maintained over all streets and access drives.

G.    Interimimprovementstandard. It is anticipated that all existing streets, except those in
      new subdivisions, will require complete reconstruction to support urban level traffic
      volumes.However,inmostcases,existingandshort-termprojectedtrafficvolumesdo
      not warrant improvements to full Master Plan standards. Therefore, unless otherwise
      specified by the Development Review Board, the following interim standards shall
      apply.
      1.      Arterials 24 foot paved, with standard sub-base. Asphalt overlays are generally
             considered unacceptable, but may be considered as an interim improvement
             based on the recommendations of the City Engineer, regarding adequate struc-
             tural quality to support an overlay.
      2.      Half-streetsaregenerallyconsideredunacceptable.However,wheretheDevelop-
             ment Review Board finds it essential to allow for reasonable development, a
             half-streetmaybeapproved.Wheneverahalf-streetimprovementisapproved,it
             shall conform to the requirements in the Public Works Standards:
      3.      Whenconsideredappropriateinconjunctionwithotheranticipatedorscheduled
             streetimprovements,theCityEngineermayapprovestreetimprovementswitha
             singleasphaltlift.However,adequateprovisionmustbemadeforinterimstorm
             drainage, pavement transitions at seams and the scheduling of the second lift
             through the Capital Improvements Plan.

                                         CD4:385
§ 4.177                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      (.03)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on the public street frontage of all development.
             Sidewalksshallgenerallybeconstructedwithinthededicatedpublicright-of-way,butmaybe
             located outside of the right-of-way within a public easement with the approval of the City
             Engineer.
             A.     Sidewalk widths shall include a minimum through zone of  at least five feet. The
                    through zone may be reduced pursuant to variance procedures in Section 4.196, a
                    waiver pursuant to Section 4.118, or by authority of the City Engineer for reasons of
                    traffic operations, efficiency, or safety.
             B.      Within a Planned Development, the Development Review Board may approve a
                    sidewalkononlyoneside.If thesidewalkispermittedonjustonesideof thestreet,the
                    ownerswillberequiredtosignanagreementtoanassessmentinthefuturetoconstruct
                    the other sidewalk if the City Council decides it is necessary.
      (.04)  BicycleFacilities.BicyclefacilitiesshallbeprovidedtoimplementtheTransportationSystem
             Plan,andmayincludeon-streetandoff-streetbikelanes,sharedlanes,bikeboulevards,and
             cycle tracks. The design of on-street bicycle facilities will vary according to the functional
             classification and the average daily traffic of the facility.

      (.05)  MultiusePathways.Pathwaysmaybeinadditionto,orinlieuof,apublicstreet.Pathsthat
             are in addition to a public street shall generally run parallel to that street, and shall be
             designedinaccordancewiththePublicWorksStandardsorasspecifiedbytheCityEngineer.
             Pathsthatareinlieuof apublicstreetshallbeconsideredinareasonlywherenootherpublic
             street connection options are feasible, and are subject to the following standards.
             A.     Paths shall be located to provide a reasonably direct connection between likely pedes-
                    trian and bicyclist destinations. Additional standards relating to entry points, maxi-
                    mum length, visibility, and path lighting are provided in the Public Works Standards.
             B.      To ensure ongoing access to and maintenance of pedestrian/bicycle paths, the City
                    Engineerwillrequirededicationof thepathtothepublicandacceptanceof thepathby
                    the City as public right-of-way; or creation of a public access easement over the path.
      (.06)  Transit Improvements. Development on sites that are adjacent to or incorporate major
             transitstreetsshallprovideimprovementsasdescribedinthissectiontoanybusstoplocated
             along the site's frontage, unless waived by the City Engineer for reasons of safety or traffic
             operations.Transitfacilitiesincludebusstops,shelters,andrelatedfacilities.Requiredtransit
             facility improvements may include the dedication of  land or the provision of  a public
             easement.
             A.     Development shall at a minimum provide:
                    1.      Reasonably direct pedestrian connections, as defined by Section 4.154, between
                           building entrances and the transit facility and between buildings on the site and
                           streets adjoining transit stops.
                    2.      Improvementsatmajortransitstops.Improvementsmayincludeintersectionor
                           mid-blocktrafficmanagementimprovementstoallowforpedestriancrossingsat
                           major transit stops.

                                                        CD4:386
                         PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.177

      B.      Developments generating an average of 49 or more pm peak hour trips shall provide
             busstopimprovementsperthePublicWorksStandards.Requiredimprovementsmay
             includeprovisionof benches,shelters,pedestrianlighting;orprovisionof aneasement
             or dedication of land for transit facilities.
      C.     In addition to the requirements of 4.177(.06)(A.)(2.), development generating more
             than199pmpeakhourtripsonmajortransitstreetsshallprovideabuspullout,curb
             extension, and intersection or mid-block traffic management improvements to allow
             for pedestrian crossings at major transit stops.
      D.     In addition to the requirements of 4.177(.06)(A.) and (B.), development generating
             more than 500 pm peak-hour trips on major transit streets shall provide on-site
             circulation to accommodate transit service.
(.07)  ResidentialPrivateAccessDrives.ResidentialPrivateAccessDrivesshallmeetthefollowing
      standards:
      A.     Residential Private Access Drives shall provide primary vehicular access to no more
             than four residential lots.
      B.      Thedesignandconstructionof aResidentialPrivateAccessDriveshallensureauseful
             lifespan and structural maintenance schedule comparable, as determined by the City
             Engineer or City's Authorized Representative, to a local street constructed in confor-
             mance to current public works standards.
             1.      Thedesignof residentialprivateaccessdrivesshallbestampedbyaprofessional
                    engineer registered in the state of Oregon and shall be approved by the City
                    EngineerorCity'sAuthorizedRepresentativetoensuretheaboverequirementis
                    met.
             2.      Priortoissuingacertificateof occupancyforanyresidentialdwellingunitwhose
                    primary vehicular access is from a Residential Private Access Drive the City
                    Engineer or City's Authorized Representative shall certify construction of the
                    Residential Private Access Drive substantially conforms the design approved by
                    the City Engineer or City's Authorized Representative.
      C.     ResidentialPrivateAccessDrivesshallbenamedforaddressingpurposes.AllResiden-
             tial Private Access Drives shall use the suffix "Lane", i.e. SW Oakview Lane.
      D.     Residential Private Access Drives shall meet or exceed the standards for access drives
             and travel lanes established in Subsection (.08) of this Section.

(.08)  AccessDriveandDrivewayApproachDevelopmentStandards:
      A.     Anaccessdrivetoanyproposeddevelopmentshallbedesignedtoprovideacleartravel
             lane free from any obstructions.
      B.      Accessdrivetravellanesshallbeconstructedwithahardsurfacecapableof carryinga
             23-ton load.
      C.     Where emergency vehicle access is required, approaches and driveways shall be de-
             signed and constructed to accommodate emergency vehicle apparatus and shall con-

                                                CD4:387
§ 4.177                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                    formtoapplicablefireprotectionrequirements.TheCitymayrestrictparking,require
                    signage,orrequireotherpublicsafetyimprovementspursuanttotherecommendations
                    of an emergency service provider.

             D.     Secondary or emergency access lanes may be improved to a minimum 12 feet with an
                    all-weather surface as approved by the Fire District. All fire lanes shall be dedicated
                    easements.

             E.     Minimum access requirements shall be adjusted commensurate with the intended
                    function of the site based on vehicle types and traffic generation.

             F.      The number of approaches on higher classification streets (e.g., collector and arterial
                    streets) shall be minimized; where practicable, access shall be taken first from a lower
                    classification street.

             G.     TheCitymaylimitthenumberorlocationof connectionstoastreet,orimposeaccess
                    restrictionswheretheroadwayauthorityrequiresmitigationtoalleviatesafetyortraffic
                    operations concerns.

             H.     TheCitymayrequireadrivewaytoextendtooneormoreedgesof alotandbedesigned
                    to allow for future extension and inter-lot circulation as adjacent properties develop.
                    TheCitymayalsorequiretheowner(s)of thesubjectsitetorecordanaccesseasement
                    for future joint use of  the approach and driveway as the adjacent property(ies)
                    develop(s).

             I.      Driveways shall accommodate all projected vehicular traffic on-site without vehicles
                    stacking or backing up onto a street.

             J.       Drivewaysshallbedesignedsothatvehicleareas,includingbutnotlimitedtodrive-up
                    and drive-through facilities and vehicle storage and service areas, do not obstruct any
                    public right-of-way.

             K.     Approaches and driveways shall not be wider than necessary to safely accommodate
                    projected peak hour trips and turning movements, and shall be designed to minimize
                    crossing distances for pedestrians.

             L.     Asitdeemsnecessaryforpedestriansafety,theCity,inconsultationwiththeroadway
                    authority,mayrequiretraffic-calmingfeatures,suchasspeedtables,textureddriveway
                    surfaces, curb extensions, signage or traffic control devices, or other features, be
                    installed on or in the vicinity of a site.

             M.    Approachesanddrivewaysshallbelocatedanddesignedtoallowforsafemaneuvering
                    in and around loading areas, while avoiding conflicts with pedestrians, parking, land-
                    scaping, and buildings.

             N.     Whereaproposeddrivewaycrossesaculvertordrainageditch,theCitymayrequirethe
                    developertoinstallaculvertextendingunderandbeyondtheedgesof thedrivewayon
                    both sides of it, pursuant applicable Public Works standards.

                                                       CD4:388
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                     § 4.179

             O.     ExceptasotherwiserequiredbytheapplicableroadwayauthorityorwaivedbytheCity
                    Engineer, temporary driveways providing access to a construction site or staging area
                    shall be paved or graveled to prevent tracking of mud onto adjacent paved streets.

             P.      Unless constrained by topography, natural resources, rail lines, freeways, existing or
                    plannedorapproveddevelopment,oreasementsorcovenants,drivewaysproposedas
                    partof aresidentialormixed-usedevelopmentshallmeetlocalstreetspacingstandards
                    and shall be constructed to align with existing or planned streets, if the driveway.
                    1.      Intersects with a public street that is controlled, or is to be controlled in the
                           planning period, by a traffic signal;
                    2.      Intersects with an existing or planned arterial or collector street; or
                    3.      Wouldbeanextensionof anexistingorplannedlocalstreet,orof anothermajor
                           driveway.

      (.09)  Minimumstreetintersectionspacingstandards:

             A.     New streets shall intersect at existing street intersections so that centerlines are not
                    offset.Whereexistingstreetsadjacenttoaproposeddevelopmentdonotalignproperly,
                    conditions shall be imposed on the development to provide for proper alignment.

             B.      MinimumintersectionspacingstandardsareprovidedinTransportationSystemPlan
                    Table 3-2.

      (.10)  ExceptionsandAdjustments.TheCitymayapproveadjustmentstothespacingstandardsof
             subsections (.08) and (.09) above through a Class II process, or as a waiver per Section
             4.118(.03)(A.), where an existing connection to a City street does not meet the standards of
             the roadway authority, the proposed development moves in the direction of Code compli-
             ance,andmitigationmeasuresalleviatealltrafficoperationsandsafetyconcerns.Mitigation
             measuresmayincludeconsolidatedaccess(removalof oneaccess),jointusedriveways(more
             than one property uses same access), directional limitations (e.g., one-way), turning restric-
             tions (e.g., right in/out only), or other mitigation.
(Ord. No. 610, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 674, 11-16-2009; Ord. No. 682, 9-1-2010; Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013)

Section  4.178. Sidewalk and Pathway Standards.

[Deleted by Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013, see Section 4.177.]

Section  4.179. Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage in New Multi-Family Residential and Non-
                  Residential Buildings.

(.01)  Allsiteplansformulti-familyresidentialandnon-residentialbuildingssubmittedtotheWilsonville
      Development Review Board for approval shall include adequate storage space for mixed solid
      waste and source separated recyclables.

(.02)  The floor area of an interior or exterior storage area shall be excluded from the calculation of
      building floor area for purposes of determining minimum storage requirements.

                                                       CD4:389
§ 4.179                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  The storage area requirement shall be based on the predominant use(s) of the building. If a
      buildinghasmorethanoneof theuseslistedhereinandthatuseoccupies20percentorlessof the
      floorareaof thebuilding,thefloorareaoccupiedbythatuseshallbecountedtowardthefloorarea
      of the predominant use(s). If a building has more than one of the uses listed herein and that use
      occupiesmorethan20percentof thefloorareaof thebuilding,thenthestoragearearequirement
      for the whole building shall be the sum of the requirement for the area of each use.

(.04)  Storage areas for multiple uses on a single site may be combined and shared.

(.05)  The specific requirements are based on an assumed storage height of four feet for solid waste/
      recyclables. Vertical storage higher than four feet but no higher than seven feet may be used to
      accommodate the same volume of storage in a reduced floor space. Where vertical or stacked
      storageisproposed,thesiteplanshallincludedrawingstoillustratethelayoutof thestoragearea
      and dimensions for the containers.

(.06)  The specific requirements for storage area are as follows:

      A.     multi-familyresidentialbuildingscontainingfive-tenunitsshallprovideaminimumstorage
             areaof 50squarefeet.Buildingscontainingmorethantenresidentialunitsshallprovidean
             additional five square feet per unit for each unit above ten.

      B.      Non-residential buildings shall provide a minimum storage area of ten square feet, plus:

             1.     Office: Four square feet per 1,000 square feet gross floor area (GFA);

             2.     Retail: Ten square feet per 1,000 square feet GFA;

             3.     Wholesale/Warehouse/Manufacturing: Six square feet per 1,000 square feet GFA; and

             4.     Other: Four square feet per 1,000 square feet GFA.

(.07)  TheapplicantshallworkwiththeCity'sfranchisedgarbagehaulertoensurethatsiteplansprovide
      adequate access for the hauler's equipment and that storage area is adequate for the anticipated
      volumes,levelof serviceandanyotherspecialcircumstanceswhichmayresultinthestoragearea
      exceeding its capacity. The hauler shall notify the City by letter of their review of site plans and
      makerecommendationsforchangesinthoseplanspursuanttotheotherprovisionsof thissection.

(.08)  Existingmulti-familyresidentialandnon-residentialdevelopmentswishingtoretrofittheirstruc-
      turestoincludestorageareasformixedsolidwasteandrecyclingmayhavetheirsiteplansreviewed
      and approved through the Class I Administrative Review process, according to the provisions of
      Section4.035.Siteplansforretrofittingexistingdevelopmentsmustconformtoallrequirementsof
      this Section, "Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage In New Multi-Family Residential and
      Non-ResidentialBuildings,"and4.430,"Location,DesignandAccessStandardsforMixedSolid
      Waste and Recycling Areas," of the Wilsonville City Code.

(.09)  When applicable, the applicant must comply with Wilsonville Code Section 8.010.
(Ord. No. 426, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 837, 8-5-2019)

                                                       CD4:390
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.184

Section  4.180. Exceptions and Modifications - Projections into Required Yards.

(.01)  Certain non-structural architectural features are permitted to project into required yards or
      courts, without requiring the approval of a Variance or Reduced Setback Agreement, as follows:

      A.     Into any required yard:

             1.      Architecturalfeaturesmayprojectintotherequiredyardnotmorethantwoinchesfor
                   each foot of required setback.

             2.      ArchitecturalfeaturesonbuildingswithintheCoffeeCreekIndustrialDesignOverlay
                   District shall be subject to the applicable requirements in Section 4.134.

             3.      Open, unenclosed fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding 48 inches.

      B.      Into any required yard, adjoining a street or tract with a private drive:

             1.      Architectural features may project a distance not exceeding 40 inches.

             2.      An uncovered porch, terrace, or patio extending no more than two and one-half feet
                   abovethefinishedelevationmayextendwithinthreefeetof aninteriorsidelotline,or
                   within ten feet of a front lot line or of an exterior side lot line.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.181. Exceptions and Modifications—Height Limits.

ExceptasstipulatedinSections4.800through4.804,heightlimitationsspecifiedelsewhereinthisCode
shall not apply to barns, silos or other farm buildings or structures on farms; to church spires, belfries,
cupolas;anddomes;monuments;watertowers;windmills;chimneys;smokestacks;fireandhosetowers;
above-groundelectrictransmission,distribution,communicationandsignallines,towersandpoles;and
properly screened mechanical and elevator structures.
(Ord. No. 856, 2-7-2022)

Section  4.182. Exceptions and Modifications—Setback Modifications.

Inanyresidentialzonewheretheaveragedepthof atleasttwoexistingfrontyardsonadjoininglotsor
within150feetof thelotinquestionandwithinthesameblockfrontislessorgreaterthantheminimum
ormaximumfrontyarddepthprescribedelsewhereinthisCode,therequireddepthof thefrontyardon
suchlotshallbemodified.Insuchcase,thefrontyarddepthshallnotbelessthantheaveragedepth,nor
morethanthegreaterdepth,of existingfrontyardsonatleasttwoadjoininglotswithin150feet.Inthe
caseof acornerlot,thedepthof thefrontyardmaybereducedtothatof thelotimmediatelyadjoining,
provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on any corner lot shall be at least ten feet.

Section  4.184. Conditional Use Permits—Authorization.

(.01)  ConditionalUseof propertymaybegrantedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardafterconcluding
      apublichearingasprovidedinSection4.013.Alandusethatis"conditional"isonethatisgenerally
      notcompatiblewithsurroundingusesunlessmitigatingconditionsof approvalareestablished.In

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:391
§ 4.184                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      actingonapplicationsforConditionalUsePermits,theDRBmayestablishconditionsof approval
      thatarefoundtobenecessarytoimplementtheComprehensivePlanortoassurecompliancewith
      the standards of this Code, based on information in the record.
      A.     AuthorizationtoGrantorDenyConditionalUses:Aconditionaluselistedinthisordinance
             shallbepermitted,altered,ordeniedinaccordancewiththestandardsandproceduresof this
             Section. In judging whether a conditional use permit shall be approved, or determining
             appropriateconditionsof approval,theDevelopmentReviewBoardshallweighthepropos-
             al'spositiveandnegativefeaturesthatwouldresultfromauthorizingtheparticulardevelop-
             mentatalocationproposed,andtoapprovesuchuse,shallfindthatthefollowingcriteriaare
             either met, can be met by observance of conditions, or are not applicable:
             1.      Theproposalwillbeconsistentwiththeprovisionsof theComprehensivePlanandthe
                   requirementsof Chapter4of theWilsonvilleCodeandotherapplicablepoliciesof the
                   City.
             2.      Thecharacteristicsof thesitearesuitablefortheproposeduseconsideringsize,shape,
                   design, location, topography, existence of improvements and natural features.
             3.      Allrequiredpublicfacilitiesandservicesexist,orwillbeprovided,toadequatelymeet
                   the needs of the proposed development.
             4.      The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in a manner
                   which substantially limits, or precludes the use of surrounding properties for the uses
                   listed as permitted in the zone.
      (.02)  Private parks shall be reviewed in accordance with the Park Standards set forth in the
             Comprehensive Plan and the Open Space and Recreation Standards set forth in Section
             4.113.
      (.03)  Municipal and government buildings shall be developed in accordance with the Planned
             Development Commercial Standards and Sections 4.178.

(.04)  ConditionalUseRegulations—Churches.
      A.    ZoneInWhichConditionallyPermitted: All Residential Zones.
      B.    ConditionStandards:
             1.     MinimumLotArea: 10,000 square feet.
             2.     MinimumStreetFrontage: 100 feet.
             3.     MaximumCoverage: 50 percent for all buildings.
             4.     MaximumBuildingHeight: 50 feet.
             5.     MinimumDepth: 125 feet.

(.05)  ConditionalUseRegulations—Public,PrivateandParochialSchools.
      A.    ZoneInWhichConditionallyPermitted: Any. (Public schools are permitted outright in any
             Public Facility zone.)

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:392
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.184

       B.      Dimensional Standards:
              1.      Minimum Land Area: Five acres, unless the Development Review Board finds a lesser
                     area is appropriate to the use and the location.
              2.      Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: A minimum of 50 feet.

       C.     Off-Street Parking: As required in Section 4.155.

(.06)  Conditional Use Regulations—Public Utility Structures.

       A.     Except as provided in this Section and Section 4.800, all transmission and public utility
              structures, including, but not limited to, distribution lines and poles, sub-transmission
              structures, lines and poles, double poles and steel towers for transmission lines, substations,
              automatic telephone exchanges, relay stations, microwave towers, satellite antennas, pump-
              ing stations and treatment plants shall be regulated as conditional uses in all zones.

       B.      Underground pipes and conduits as provided in Sections 4.300 to 4.320 and any existing
              above ground electric distribution, sub-transmission and transmission, communication and
              signal lines and poles of a single pole system and existing above ground transformers which
              are not in violation of Sections 4.300 to 4.320 and any current or future applicable franchise
              agreement shall be a permitted use in any zone. This section shall not be construed as
              permitting any substantial intensification of use.

(.07)  Conditional Use Regulations—Service Stations.

       A.     The Development Review Board shall approve Conditional Use Permit applications for new
              service stations only where the design, location and use are compatible with and do not
              adversely impact the surrounding uses.

       B.      No gasoline station shall be located closer than 200 feet from any school, public playground,
              church, or hospital. Where the subject property is less than five acres in area, the required
              separation shall be measured to the property line.

       C.     Dimensional Standards:
              1.      Minimum Front Yard Setback:
                     a.      Building or Structures: 30 feet from property line.
                     b.      Signs, gasoline pumps, pump islands, and enclosed buildings, excluding attached
                            or detached canopies: 15 feet from property line.
                     c.      Attached or Detached Canopies: Two feet from property line.
              2.      Minimum Rear Yard Setback: As required in the particular district.
              3.      Minimum Side Yard Setback: As required in the particular district.
              4.      Minimum Street Frontage: 100 feet.
              5.      Minimum Lot Depth: 60 feet.
              6.      Minimum Lot Size: 12,000 square feet.
              7.      All other dimensional standards as required in the particular district.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:393
§ 4.184                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       D.     Vehicles. All vehicles for service, parked or under the control of any employee shall be on
              private property and shall not be on any required landscaped area.
       E.     Permitted Services. Sales and services shall be limited to the sale of motor fuels and supplying
              goods and service generally required in the operation and maintenance of  automotive
              vehicles and fulfilling a motorist's needs. Those may include sale of petroleum products; sale
              and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items; washing and
              lubricating services; the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair, and the
              supplying of other incidental customer services and products. Major automotive repairs,
              painting, and body and fender work are excluded.

       F.      Access, Parking and Circulation Requirements:
              1.      Each developed site shall not have more than two accessways to any one street.
              2.      No vehicles subject to the control of the operator of the premises may temporarily be
                     parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways, alleys or other public ways.
       G.     Site Screening. Where a service station abuts property in a residential district, a six foot high,
              solid masonry wall, site-screening decorative fence, or dense evergreen hedge shall be
              constructed and maintained on such abutting lines. When the wall, fence, or screening
              reaches the required front yard setback, it shall decrease to a height of  three feet. See
              landscape standards, Section 4.176.
       H.     Lighting. All outside lighting shall be so arranged and shielded so as not to shine into
              adjacent residential areas and to prevent any undue glare or reflection and any nuisance,
              inconvenience, and hazardous interference of any kind on adjoining streets or property. All
              lighting used shall be erected only on the same premises with the use. The Certificate of
              Occupancy shall not be issued until compliance with this standard has been verified.

       I.      All proposed service stations may be subject to design review by the City depending upon the
              particular site to be utilized in the establishment thereof.
       J.       Service stations shall, in addition to the above, meet the following requirements:
              1.      No vehicle may be parked on the premises and offered for sale, lease or rent.
              2.      Automotive repair and lubricating operations and all sales other than petroleum
                     products shall be conducted within the service station building.
              3.      Signs shall not cause any glare or reflection of light on other property or building.
              4.      No banner or pennants shall be permitted except by Temporary Permit.
              5.      Landscaping:
                     a.      A minimum of 100 square feet of raised planting area shall be installed and
                            maintained at the intersection of the property lines at a street corner.
                     b.      A minimum of  20 square feet of  raised planting area shall be installed and
                            maintained along the building facades fronting on a street.
                     c.      Entrances of all restrooms shall be screened from view of adjacent properties or
                            street right-of-way.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:394
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.189

                     d.      All outside recycling, trash, garbage, and refuse areas shall be enclosed on at least
                            four sides, and each side shall be at least six feet in height.

(.08)  Conditional Use Regulations—Willamette River Greenway Development.
       A.     The Development Review Board shall approve Conditional Use Permit applications for new
              development in the Willamette River Greenway only as specified in Section 4.500 and this
              Section.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.189.  Non-Conforming Uses.

(.01)  Continuation of Use:
       A.     A non-conforming use may be continued subject to the requirements of this Section.
       B.      A manufactured or mobile home placed on a lot, parcel or tract of land and certified to be a
              non-conforming use shall be allowed to continue in that status. A non-conforming mobile
              home may be replaced by a newer Manufactured Home as defined herein.
       C.     A pre-existing use that is listed as "conditional" in the zone shall be considered to be
              non-conforming until such time as a conditional use permit is issued for it. In reviewing an
              application for a conditional use permit for a use that already legally exists, the Development
              Review Board shall establish conditions of approval that are proportional in scope to the
              changes proposed in the application and shall not establish conditions that prevent the
              continued operation of the use.

(.02)  Change of Use:

       A.     A non-conforming use may not be changed unless the change or replacement is to a use that
              is determined by the Planning Director to be no less conforming to the regulations for the
              zone district in which the use is located than the existing use.

       B.      In any zone where single-family dwellings are permitted, a non-conforming mobile or
              manufactured home may be replaced provided that the Planning Director determines that the
              replacement unit meets the requirements for manufactured housing units on individual lots
              specified in Section 4.115.

(.03)  Abandoned Use. If a non-conforming use is abandoned for a period of 18 consecutive months, the
       use shall not be re-established without fully complying with the use requirements of the zone. Mere
       vacancy of a site or building while it is being marketed or other plans for its use are being readied,
       does not constitute abandonment. In order to be considered abandoned, a site must not be
       receiving City utilities and must not actively be marketed for rent, lease, or sale. These standards
       concerning abandonment do not in any way affect the City's processes for the abatement of
       nuisances as delineated in Chapter 6 of the Wilsonville Code.

(.04)  Damage and Destruction. When a structure that is a non-conforming use or a building containing
       a non-conforming use is damaged by any cause, exceeding 75 percent of its replacement cost, as
       determined by the Building Official, the structure shall not be re-established unless the owners of
       that structure promptly and diligently pursue its repair or replacement. If all required building

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:395
§ 4.189                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       permits  have  not  been  received  within  18  months  of  the  damage  or  destruction,  the  non-
       conforming use shall not be re-established without meeting all of the requirements of Chapter 4.
       City staff will use the address listed in County Assessor records to contact the owners of properties
       that have been damaged to alert them to the time limitations for receiving a building permit for
       repair or replacement. The property owner's failure to receive such notification does not alter or
       extend the time limit specified in this subsection.

(.05)  Enlargements and Moving. A non-conforming use, may be permitted to enlarge up to 20 percent in
       floor area on approval of a conditional use permit by the Development Review Board.

(.06)  Repairs.
       A.     Normal maintenance of a structure containing a non-conforming use is permitted provided
              that any exterior additions meet the requirements of this Section.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002)

Section  4.190.  Non-Conforming Structures.

(.01)  A non-conforming structure that is in use may continue to be used.
(.02)  If a non-conforming structure is abandoned, as defined herein, for a period of 18 months, it may
       not again be used unless brought into conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. Except,
       however, that an abandoned non-conforming structure may be re-occupied if  a Variance is
       approved per the requirements of Section 4.196.

(.03)  When a non-conforming structure is damaged by any cause exceeding 75 percent of its replace-
       ment cost, as determined by the Building Official, the non-conforming structure shall not be
       re-established unless all required building permits for the repair or replacement are received within
       18 months of the damage. City staff will endeavor to contact the owners of properties that have
       been damaged to alert them to the time limitations for receiving a building permit for repair or
       replacement. The property owner's failure to receive such notification does not alter or extend the
       time limit specified in this subsection.

(.04)  Normal maintenance of a non-conforming structure is permitted, provided that any exterior
       additions meet the requirements of this Section.

(.05)  A non-conforming structure may be expanded or enlarged, provided that the portion of the
       structure being enlarged meets zoning requirements in terms of setbacks, height, and lot coverage.

Section  4.191.  Non-Conforming Site Conditions.

(.01)  A property with non-conforming site conditions that is in use may continue to be used.

(.02)  If a property with non-conforming site conditions is abandoned, as defined herein, for a period of
       18 months, it may not again be used unless brought into conformity with the requirements of this
       ordinance. Except, however, that an abandoned property with non-conforming site conditions may
       be re-occupied if a Variance is approved per the requirements of Section 4.196.

(.03)  Normal maintenance of a property with non-conforming site conditions is permitted, provided
       that the site conditions do not become even less conforming as a result.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:396
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.196

(.04)  Any application for a change of occupancy, as determined by the City's Building Official, or any
       application for discretionary review by the City shall justify conditions of approval that will bring
       the site into conformity with site improvement standards.

(.05)  A structure with non-conforming site conditions may be expanded or enlarged, provided that
       there is a proportional decrease in the non-conforming site conditions. For example, an application
       to expand the floor area of a building by 10%, on a site that has 20% shortage of required bicycle
       parking, will be permitted, provided that at least a 10% increase in bicycle parking is also provided.
(Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.192.  Non-Conforming Lots.

(.01)  Except as provided in subsection (.02), a non-conforming lot may be used for any purpose allowed
       by zoning, provided that any structure built or located upon a non-conforming lot must meet all of
       the lot development standards of the zone, or be approved through the Variance procedures of
       Section 4.196. Except, however, if the non-conforming lot is contiguous to other property under
       legal control of the same owner or owners, no variance shall be granted for a structure or use that
       could be accommodated on that contiguous lot, or combination of lots, without a Variance.

(.02)  In the R, OTR, PDR, V, and RN zones, all middle housing types except duplexes must meet
       applicable minimum lot size requirements for that zoning district.

(.03)  A lot line adjustment between nonconforming lots may be approved where either:

       A.     Both lots involved in the adjustment will be conforming to zoning standards as a result of the
              adjustment; or

       B.      The Planning Director or Development Review Board finds, based on information in the
              record, that each of the lots involved in the adjustment will be suitable for development as
              allowed in the zone, as a result of the adjustment.

Section  4.196.  Variances.

(.01)  Where difficulties exist rendering compliance with Chapter 4 impractical and such compliance
       would create unnecessary hardship to the owner or user of land or buildings, the Development
       Review Board may grant a variance from the provisions of this Code after the prescribed public
       hearing as set forth in Section 4.013, and after an investigation; provided all of the following
       conditions exist:

       A.     The difficulty would apply to the particular land or building regardless of the owner.

       B.      The request for a variance is not the result of an illegal act on the part of the applicant or the
              applicant's agent.

       C.     The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances, such as lot size or shape, topography,
              and size or shape of  building, which are not typical of  the general conditions of  the
              surrounding area.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:397
§ 4.196                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       D.     The practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship asserted as a ground for a variance must
              relate to the premises for which the variance is sought and not to other premises or personal
              conditions of the applicant.
       E.     The variance does not allow the property to be used for purposes not authorized within the
              zone involved.
       F.      The variance is the minimum necessary to relieve the hardship.
       G.     Where the variance is sought to allow development within a flood zone, the following
              additional standards shall apply:
              l.       Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the flood hazard elevation
                     standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be
                     erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
                     with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items a-k in
                     Section 4.172 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical
                     justification required for issuing the variance increases.
              2.      Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of struc-
                     tures listed on the National Register of  Historic Places or the State Inventory of
                     Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this subsection.
              3.      Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
                     during the base flood discharge would result.
              4.      Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
                     necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
              5.      Variances shall only be issued upon:
                     a.      a showing of good and sufficient cause;
                     b.      a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
                             hardship to the applicant; and
                     c.      a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
                             heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
                             nuisances, or conflict with other existing local laws or ordinances.
              6.      Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the
                     general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are
                     not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or
                     financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated resi-
                     dential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations will rarely be
                     granted.
              7.      Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to
                     allow a lesser degree of flood proofing than watertight or dry-floodproofing, where it
                     can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, and complies with
                     all other variance criteria except Section 4.172.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:398
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.197

             8.      Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the
                   structurewillbepermittedtobebuiltwithalowestfloorelevationbelowthebaseflood
                   elevationandthatthecostof floodinsurancewillbecommensuratewiththeincreased
                   risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

Section  4.197. Zone Changes and Amendments to This Code—Procedures.

(.01)  The following procedure shall be followed in applying for an amendment to the text of this
      Chapter:

      A.     ThePlanningCommissionshallconductapublichearingontheproposedamendmentatits
             earliestpracticablemeetingafteritisproposedandshall,within40daysafterconcludingthe
             hearing, provide a report and recommendation to the City Council regarding the proposed
             amendment. The findings and recommendations of the Commission shall be adopted by
             resolution and shall be signed by the Chair of the Commission.

      B.      Inrecommendingapprovalof aproposedtextamendment,thePlanningCommissionshall,
             at a minimum, adopt findings relative to the following:
             1.      That the application was submitted in compliance with the procedures set forth in
                   Section 4.008; and

             2.      Theamendmentsubstantiallycomplieswithallapplicablegoals,policiesandobjectives
                   set forth in the Comprehensive Plan; and

             3.      The amendment does not materially conflict with, nor endanger, other provisions of
                   the text of the Code; and
             4.      If applicable, the amendment is in compliance with Statewide Land Use Planning
                   Goals and related administrative rules; and

             5.      If applicable, the amendment is necessary to ensure that the City's Land Use and
                   Development Ordinance complies with mandated requirements of State or Federal
                   laws and/or statutes.

(.02)  The following procedures shall be followed for zone map amendments.

      A.     When a requested quasi-judicial zone map amendment within the Coffee Creek Industrial
             Design Overlay District is consistent with the adopted or concurrently proposed Compre-
             hensive Plan Map designation and only one option exists for a zone map amendment
             consistent with the Comprehensive Plan Map the amendment shall be reviewed by the City
             Council without prior review or recommendation by the Development Review Board or
             Planning Commission.

             1.      The Zoning Order adopting such zone map amendments shall state the zone map
                   amendment expires 120 days from Council adoption unless a Stage II Final Plan
                   receives final local approval for the area subject to the zone map amendment. In the
                   eventof aLUBAappealof thefinallocalapproval,the120-dayexpirationperiodwill
                   be tolled pending completion of the appeal process.

                                                      CD4:399
§ 4.197                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             2.      Notwithstanding the process described above an applicant may elect to have the zone
                   mapamendmentreviewedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardforarecommendationto
                   City Council concurrently with other land use applications for the subject property.

             3.      If the Planning Director anticipates that individuals other than the applicant can be
                   expected to question the requested zone map amendment's compliance with the
                   Comprehensive Plan the Planning Director may require the zone map amendment be
                   first reviewed by the Development Review Board to make a recommendation to City
                   Council.

      B.      Allotherquasi-judicialzonemapamendmentsshallbereviewedbytheDevelopmentReview
             BoardtomakearecommendationtoCityCouncilandalllegislativezonemapamendments
             shallbereviewedbythePlanningCommissiontomakearecommendationtoCityCouncil.

      C.     In recommending approval or denial of a proposed zone map amendment, the Planning
             CommissionorDevelopmentReviewBoardshallataminimum,adoptfindingsaddressing
             the following criteria:

             1.      That the application before the Commission or Board was submitted in accordance
                   withtheproceduressetforthinSection4.008,Section4.125(.18)(B)(2)or,inthecaseof
                   a Planned Development, Section 4.140; and

             2.      That the proposed amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan map desig-
                   nationandsubstantiallycomplieswiththeapplicablegoals,policiesandobjectives,set
                   forth in the Comprehensive Plan text; and

             3.      In the event that the subject property, or any portion thereof, is designated as "Resi-
                   dential" on the City's Comprehensive Plan Map; specific findings shall be made
                   addressingsubstantialcompliancewithImplementationMeasures4.1.4.b,d,e,q,and
                   x of Wilsonville's Comprehensive Plan text; and

             4.      That the existing primary public facilities, i.e., roads and sidewalks, water, sewer and
                   stormsewerareavailableandareof adequatesizetoservetheproposeddevelopment;
                   or, that adequate facilities can be provided in conjunction with project development.
                   The Planning Commission and Development Review Board shall utilize any and all
                   means to insure that all primary facilities are available and are adequately sized; and

             5.      That the proposed development does not have a significant adverse effect upon
                   SignificantResourceOverlayZoneareas,anidentifiednaturalhazard,oranidentified
                   geologic hazard. When Significant Resource Overlay Zone areas or natural hazard,
                   and/orgeologichazardarelocatedonorabuttheproposeddevelopment,thePlanning
                   CommissionorDevelopmentReviewBoardshalluseappropriatemeasurestomitigate
                   and significantly reduce conflicts between the development and identified hazard or
                   Significant Resource Overlay Zone; and

             6.      Thattheapplicantiscommittedtoadevelopmentscheduledemonstratingthatdevel-
                   opment of the property is reasonably expected to commence within two years of the
                   initial approval of the zone change; and

                                                      CD4:400
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.197

             7.      That the proposed development and use(s) can be developed in compliance with the
                    applicable development standards or appropriate conditions are attached that insure
                    that the project development substantially conforms to the applicable development
                    standards; and
             8.      Adequate public facilities, services, and transportation networks are in place, or are
                    planned to be provided concurrently with the development of  the property. The
                    applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule, spe-
                    cificallybyaddressingwhethertheproposedamendmenthasasignificanteffectonthe
                    transportation system pursuant to OAR 660-012-0060. A Traffic Impact Analysis
                    (TIA) shall be prepared pursuant to the requirements in Section 4.133.05.(01).

(.03)  If affirmativefindingscannotbemadeforallapplicablecriterialistedabovetheproposedtextor
      map amendment, as the case may be, shall be denied.

(.04)  City Council action approving a change in zoning shall be in the form of a Zoning Order.

(.05)  IncaseswhereapropertyownerorotherapplicanthasrequestedachangeinzoningandtheCity
      Council has approved the change subject to conditions, the owner or applicant shall sign a
      statementaccepting,andagreeingtocompletetheconditionsof approvalbeforethezoningshall
      be changed.

In the Matter of the Application of                                                         )
                                                                                    )
                                                                                    )    ZONING ORDER NO.
for a rezoning of land and amendment                                                   )
of the City of Wilsonville Zoning Map                                                   )
as incorporated in Section 4.102                                                              )
of the Wilsonville Code                                                                            )

Theabove-entitledmatterisbeforetheCounciltoconsidertheapplicationof forazonechangeandan
orderamendingtheofficialZoningMapasincorporatedinSection4.102of theWilsonvilleCode,and

It appearing to the Council that the property which is the subject of this application is described as
follows:

(Legal Description)

and such property has heretofore appeared on the official Zoning Map zoned as follows:

and the Council having heard and considered all matters relevant to the application, including the
Planning Commission and/or Development Review Board resolution and minutes, finds that the
application should be (approved/denied), and it is therefore,

(Incorporated Conditions)
             ORDERED that the property above-described is hereby rezoned as follows:

and such rezoning be and the same is hereby declared an amendment to the Wilsonville Zoning Map
(Section 4.102 WC) and shall appear as such from and after entry of this Order.

                                                        CD4:401
§ 4.197                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

The property subject to this Zoning Order is also subject to the Order of the City Council in respect
thereto made.

      DATED:    This                    day of                    , 19        .

                    Mayor

Approved as to form:

ATTEST:

City Recorder

City of Wilsonville, Oregon

by:

      City Recorder
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.198. Comprehensive Plan Changes—Adoption by the City Council.

(.01)  Proposals to amend the Comprehensive Plan, or to adopt new elements or sub-elements of the
      Plan, shall be subject to the procedures and criteria contained in the Comprehensive Plan. Each
      such amendment shall include findings in support of the following:

      A.     That the proposed amendment meets a public need that has been identified;

      B.      That the proposed amendment meets the identified public need at least as well as any other
             amendment or change that could reasonably be made;

      C.     That the proposed amendment supports applicable Statewide Planning Goals, or a Goal
             exception has been found to be appropriate; and

      D.     Thattheproposedchangewillnotresultinconflictswithanyportionof theComprehensive
             Plan that is not being amended.

(.02)  When a requested quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan Map amendment within the Coffee Creek
      IndustrialDesignOverlayDistrictisconsistentwithanadoptedmasterplanthatisasub-element
      of theComprehensivePlanandonlyoneoptionexistsforaComprehensivePlanMapamendment
      consistent with the adopted area plan the amendment shall be reviewed by the City Council
      without prior review or recommendation by the Development Review Board or Planning Com-
      mission.

      A.     The ordinance adopting such Comprehensive Plan Map amendments shall state the Com-
             prehensivePlanMapamendmentexpires120daysfromCounciladoptionunlessaStageII
             FinalPlanreceivesfinallocalapprovalfortheareasubjecttotheComprehensivePlanMap
             amendment. In the event of  a LUBA appeal of  the final local approval, the 120-day
             expiration period will be tolled pending completion of the appeal process.

                                                      CD4:402
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                             § 4.199.10

      B.      Notwithstanding the process described above an applicant may elect to have the Compre-
            hensivePlanMapamendmentreviewedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardforarecommen-
            dationtoCityCouncilconcurrentlywithotherlanduseapplicationsforthesubjectproperty.

      C.     If thePlanningDirectoranticipatesthatindividualsotherthantheapplicantcanbeexpected
            to question the requested Comprehensive Plan Map amendment's compliance with the
            adopted master plan the Planning Director may require the Comprehensive Plan Map
            amendmentbefirstreviewedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardtomakearecommendation
            to City Council.

(.03)  All other quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan Map Amendments shall be reviewed by the Devel-
      opmentReviewBoardtomakearecommendationtoCityCouncilandalllegislativeComprehen-
      sivePlanMapAmendmentsshallbereviewedbythePlanningCommissiontomakearecommen-
      dation to City Council.

(.04)  Asapplicablefollowingtheadoptionandsignatureof theResolutionbytheDevelopmentReview
      Board or Planning Commission, together with minutes of  public hearings on the proposed
      Amendment, the matter shall be shall be scheduled for public hearing before the City Council.

(.05)  Noticeof theCouncil'sconsiderationof themattershallbeprovidedassetforthinSection4.012.

(.06)  Upon conclusion of its public hearing on the matter, the Council shall adopt its decision by
      ordinance, authorizing the Planning Director to amend the official zoning map, Comprehensive
      Plan Map or the text of Chapter 4 as set forth in Section 4.102.

(.07)  IncaseswhereapropertyownerorotherapplicanthasrequestedanamendmenttotheCompre-
      hensivePlanmapandtheCityCouncilhasapprovedthechangesubjecttoconditions,theowner
      orapplicantshallsignastatementaccepting,andagreeingtocompletetheconditionsof approval
      before the Comprehensive Plan map shall be changed.
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.199. Outdoor Lighting.

Section  4.199.10. Outdoor Lighting In General.

(.01)  Purpose. The purpose of this Code is to provide regulations for outdoor lighting that will:

      A.     Permitreasonableusesof outdoorlightingfornighttimesafety,utility,security,productivity,
            enjoyment and commerce.

      B.      Conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible.

      C.     Minimize glare, particularly in and around public rights-of-way; and reduce visual discom-
            fortandimprovevisualacuityoverlargeareasbyavoiding"lightislands"and"spotlighting"
            thatresultinreducedvisualperceptioninareasadjacenttoeitherthesourceof theglareor
            the area illuminated by the glare.

      D.     Minimize light trespass, so that each owner of property does not cause unreasonable light
            spillover to other property.

                                                     CD4:403
§ 4.199.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

       E.     Curtail the degradation of the nighttime environment and the night sky.
       F.      Preserve the dark night sky for astronomy and enjoyment.
       G.     Protect the natural environment, including wildlife, from the damaging effects of  night
              lighting from human sources.

(.02)  Purpose Statement as Guidelines: Declaration of  purpose statements are guidelines and not
       approval criteria in the application of WC Section 4.199.

Section  4.199.20. Applicability.

(.01)  This Ordinance is applicable to:
       A.     Installation of new exterior lighting systems in public facility, commercial, industrial and
              multi-family housing projects with common areas.
       B.      Major additions or modifications (as defined in this Section) to existing exterior lighting
              systems in public facility, commercial, industrial and multi-family housing projects with
              common areas.
(.02)  Exemption. The following luminaires and lighting systems are EXEMPT from these require-
       ments:
       A.     Interior lighting.
       B.      Internally illuminated signs.
       C.     Externally illuminated signs.
       D.     Temporary lighting for theatrical, television, and performance areas.
       E.     LightinginswimmingpoolsandotherwaterfeaturesgovernedbyArticle680of theNational
              Electrical Code.
       F.      Building Code required exit path lighting.
       G.     Lighting specifically for stairs and ramps.
       H.     Temporary and seasonal lighting provided that individual lamps are 10 watts or less.
       I.      Lighting required and/or regulated by the City (i.e. construction related activities), Federal
              Aviation Administration, U.S. Coast Guard or other Federal or State agency.
       J.       Single-family residential lighting.
       K.     Code Required Signs.
       L.     American flag.
       M.    Landscape lighting.

       N.     Lights approved by the City through an Administrative Review Temporary Use Permit
              process.
       O.     Public street lights.
       P.      ATM security lighting.

                                                          CD4:404
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.199.30

      Q.     Those "Exceptions" listed in the "Exterior Lighting Power Allowance" provisions of the
             Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code.
(Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010)

Section  4.199.30. Lighting Overlay Zones.

(.01)  ThedesignatedLightingZoneasindicatedontheLightingOverlayZoneMapforacommercial,
      industrial, multi-family or public facility parcel or project shall determine the limitations for
      lighting systems and fixtures as specified in this Ordinance.

      A.     Propertymaycontainmorethanonelightingzonedependingonsiteconditionsandnatural
             resource characteristics.

(.02)  The Lighting Zones shall be:

      A.    LZ1.DevelopedareasinCityandStateparks,recreationareas,SROZwetlandandwildlife
             habitat areas; developed areas in natural settings; sensitive night environments; and rural
             areas. This zone is intended to be the default condition for rural areas within the City.

      B.    LZ2. Low-density suburban neighborhoods and suburban commercial districts, industrial
             parksanddistricts.Thiszoneisintendedtobethedefaultconditionforthemajorityof the
             City.

      C.    LZ3. Medium to high-density suburban neighborhoods and districts, major shopping and
             commercial districts as depicted on the Lighting Overlay Zone Map.

      D.    LZ 4. Reserved for limited applications with special lighting requirements. This zone is
             appropriate for users who have unique site or operating circumstances that warrant addi-
             tional light. This zone shall not be applied to residential or agricultural areas.

(.03)  Modification of Lighting Zones.

      A.     The City Council may modify the designated Lighting Zones of one or more parcels if the
             CityCouncilfindsthattheoriginalLightingZonewasinerror,achangeincircumstanceshas
             occurredwarrantingthechangesincethedesignationwasestablishedorthepurposesof this
             section are better served.

      B.      TheDevelopmentReviewBoard(DRB)maymodifythedesignatedLightingZonesaspart
             of theStageII,SiteDesignReviewProcessif theDRBfindsthattheoriginalLightingZone
             was in error, or a change in circumstances has occurred warranting the change since the
             designation was established or the purposes of this section are better served.

      C.     This ordinance establishes a Lighting Overlay Zone Map. The Planning Division shall
             maintain the current Lighting Overlay Zone Map. Section 4.199.40. Lighting Systems
             Standards for Approval.
(Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010)

                                                      CD4:405
§ 4.199.40                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.199.40. Lighting Systems Standards for Approval.

(.01)  Non-ResidentialUsesandCommonResidentialAreas.
      A.     All outdoor lighting shall comply with either the Prescriptive Option or the Performance
             Option below.
      B.    PrescriptiveOption. If the lighting is to comply with this Prescriptive Option, the installed
             lighting shall meet all of the following requirements according to the designated Lighting
             Zone.
             1.      The maximum luminaire lamp wattage and shielding shall comply with Table 7.
             2.      ExceptforthoseexemptionslistedinSection4.199.20(.02),theexteriorlightingforthe
                    siteshallcomplywiththeOregonEnergyEfficiencySpecialtyCode,ExteriorLighting.
             3.      The maximum pole or mounting height shall be consistent with Table 8.
             4.      Each luminaire shall be set back from all property lines at least three times the
                    mounting height of the luminaire:
                    a.     Exception 1: If the subject property abuts a property with the same base and
                           lighting zone, no setback from the common lot lines is required.
                    b.     Exception2: If the subject property abuts a property which is zoned (base and
                           lighting)otherthanthesubjectparcel,theluminaireshallbesetbackthreetimes
                           the mounting height of  the luminaire, measured from the abutting parcel's
                           setbackline.(Anyvarianceorwaivertotheabuttingproperty'ssetbackshallnot
                           be considered in the distance calculation).
                    c.     Exception 3: If the luminaire is used for the purpose of street, parking lot or
                           public utility easement illumination and is located less than three mounting
                           heights from the property line, the luminaire shall include a house side shield to
                           protect adjoining property.
                    d.     Exception 4: If the subject property includes an exterior column, wall or abut-
                           mentwithin25feetof thepropertyline,aluminairepartlyshieldedorbetterand
                           not exceeding 60 lamp watts may be mounted onto the exterior column, wall or
                           abutment or under or within an overhang or canopy attached thereto.
                    e.     Exception5: Lighting adjacent to SROZ areas shall be set back three times the
                           mounting height of the luminaire, or shall employ a house side shield to protect
                           the natural resource area.
      C.    PerformanceOption.If thelightingistocomplywiththePerformanceOption,theproposed
             lightingdesignshallbesubmittedbytheapplicantforapprovalbytheCitymeetingallof the
             following:
             1.      Theweightedaveragepercentageof directuplightlumensshallbelessthantheallowed
                    amount per Table 9.
             2.      ThemaximumlightlevelatanypropertylineshallbelessthanthevaluesinTable9,as
                    evidencedbyacompletephotometricanalysisincludinghorizontalilluminanceof the
                    site and vertical illuminance on the plane facing the site up to the mounting height of

                                                       CD4:406
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.199.40

                    the luminaire mounted highest above grade. The Building Official or designee may
                    accept a photometric test report, demonstration or sample, or other satisfactory
                    confirmation that the luminaire meets the shielding requirements of Table 7. Lumi-
                    naires shall not be mounted so as to permit aiming or use in any way other than the
                    manner maintaining the shielding classification required herein:
                    a.     Exception1.If thepropertylineabutsapublicright-of-way,includingasidewalk
                          orstreet,theanalysismaybeperformedacrossthestreetattheadjacentproperty
                          line to the right-of-way.
                    b.     Exception2.If,intheopinionof theBuildingOfficialordesignee,complianceis
                          impracticalduetouniquesitecircumstancessuchaslotsizeorshape,topography,
                          or size or shape of building, which are circumstances not typical of the general
                          conditionsof thesurroundingarea.TheBuildingOfficialmayimposeconditions
                          of approvaltoavoidlighttrespasstothemaximumextentpossibleandminimize
                          anyadditionalnegativeimpactsresultingtoabuttingandadjacentparcels,aswell
                          as public rights-of-way, based on best lighting practices and available lighting
                          technology.
             3.      The maximum pole or mounting height shall comply with Table 8.

      D.    Curfew.Allprescriptiveorperformancebasedexteriorlightingsystemsshallbecontrolledby
             automatic device(s) or system(s) that:
             1.      Initiate operation at dusk and either extinguish lighting one hour after close or at the
                    curfew times according to Table 10; or
             2.      Reducelightingintensityonehouraftercloseoratthecurfewtimetonotmorethan50
                    percent of the requirements set forth in the Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code
                    unless waived by the DRB due to special circumstances; and
             3.      Extinguish or reduce lighting consistent with 1. and 2. above on Holidays.
                    The following are exceptions to curfew:
                    a.     Exception1: Building Code required lighting.
                    b.     Exception2: Lighting for pedestrian ramps, steps and stairs.
                    c.     Exception3: Businesses that operate continuously or periodically after curfew.

(.02)  SpecialPermitforSpecificLightingFixturesandSystemsandWhenExceedingLightingRequire-
      ments.

      A.     This section is intended to apply to situations where more than normal foot candles are
             requiredduetoauniquecircumstanceoruseorwhereitisabsolutelyessentialtoperformthe
             proposed activities after dark. All special permits shall be reviewed by the DRB.

      B.      Upon issuance of  a special permit by the Development Review Board (DRB), lighting
             systems not complying with the technical requirements of this Ordinance may be installed,
             maintained, and replaced for lighting that exceeds the maximums permitted by this Ordi-
             nance.Thissectionisintendedtobeappliedtousessuchassportslightingsystemsincluding
             but not limited to, sport fields and stadiums, such as baseball and football field lighting,

                                                       CD4:407
§ 4.199.40                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

             tennis court lighting, swimming pool area lighting and prisons; other very intense lighting
             definedashavingalightsourceexceeding200,000lumensoranintensityinanydirectionof
             more than 2,000,000 candelas; building façade lighting of portions of buildings over two
             stories high; and public monuments.
      C.     Toobtainsuchapermit,applicantsshalldemonstratethattheproposedlightinginstallation:
             1.      Is within Lighting Zone 3 or above.
             2.      Has been designed to minimize obtrusive light and artificial sky glow, supported by a
                    signedstatementfromaregisteredcivilorelectricalengineerdescribingthemitigation
                    measures. Such statement shall be accompanied by calculations indicating the light
                    trespass levels (horizontal and vertical at ground level) at the property line.
             3.      Will not create excessive glare, sky glow, or light trespass beyond that which can be
                    reasonablyexpectedbyapplicationof bestlightingpractices,andavailabletechnology.
             4.      Providesappropriatelightingcurfewhoursbasedontheuseandthesurroundingareas.

      D.     The DRB may impose conditions of approval to mitigate any negative impacts resulting to
             the abutting parcel, based on best lighting practices and available lighting technology.
      E.     The City may charge a review fee and may, at the Building Official's option, employ the
             servicesof aqualifiedprofessionalcivilorelectricalengineertoreviewsuchsubmittalsand
             the cost thereof shall be an additional fee charged to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010)

Section  4.199.50. Submittal Requirements.

(.01)  Applicantsshallsubmitthefollowinginformationaspartof DRBrevieworadministrativereview
      of new commercial, industrial, multi-family or public facility projects:

      A.     Astatementregardingwhichof thelightingmethodswillbeutilized,prescriptiveorperfor-
             mance, and a map depicting the lighting zone(s) for the property.

      B.      A site lighting plan that clearly indicates intended lighting by type and location. For
             adjustable luminaires, the aiming angles or coordinates shall be shown.

      C.     For each luminaire type, drawings, cut sheets or other documents containing specifications
             for the intended lighting including but not limited to, luminaire description, mounting,
             mounting  height,  lamp  type  and  manufacturer,  lamp  watts,  ballast,  optical  system/
             distribution, and accessories such as shields.

      D.     Calculations demonstrating compliance with Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code,
             Exterior Lighting, as modified by Section 4.199.40(.01)(B.)(2.)

      E.     Lighting plans shall be coordinated with landscaping plans so that pole lights and trees are
             not placed in conflict with one another. The location of  lights shall be shown on the
             landscape plan. Generally, pole lights should not be placed within one pole length of
             landscape and parking lot trees.

      F.      Applicants shall identify the hours of lighting curfew.

                                                        CD4:408
                                   PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.199.60

(.02)  In addition to the above submittal requirements, Applicants using the Prescriptive Method shall
       submit the following information as part of the permit set plan review:
       A.     A site lighting plan (items 1.A—F, above) which indicates for each luminaire the three
              mounting height line to demonstrate compliance with the setback requirements. For lumi-
              nairesmountedwithinthreemountingheightsof thepropertylinethecomplianceexception
              or special shielding requirements shall be clearly indicated.
(.03)  Inadditiontotheabovesubmittalrequirements,ApplicantsusingthePerformanceMethodshall
       submit the following information as part of the permit set plan review:
       A.     Site plan showing horizontal isocandle lines, or the output of a point-by-point computer
              calculationof thehorizontalilluminationof thesite,showingpropertylinesandlightlevels
              immediately off of the subject property.
       B.      Foreachsideof theproperty,theoutputof apoint-by-pointverticalfootcandlecalculation
              showingilluminationintheverticalplaneatthepropertylinefromgradetoatleasttenfeet
              higher than the height of the tallest pole.
       C.     Lighting plans shall be prepared by a qualified licensed engineer.
(.04)  In addition to the above applicable submittal requirements, Applicants for Special Permits shall
       submit the following to the DRB for review:
       A.     Tabulation of International Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) lighting rec-
              ommendations for each task including area illuminated, recommended illumination level,
              actualmaintainedilluminationlevel,andluminairesusedspecificallytoachievetheindicated
              criteria.
       B.      Lighting plans shall be prepared by a qualified licensed engineer.
(.05)  Forallcalculations,thefollowinglightlossfactorsshallbeusedunlessanalternativeisspecifically
       approved by the City:

           Metal halide                                                                                     0.6
           High pressure sodium                                                                      0.8
           Compact fluorescent                                                                       0.7
           Full size fluorescent                                                                         0.75
           Incandescent                                                                                    0.9
           Halogen                                                                                            0.95
           Other                                                                                                 As approved

(Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010)

Section  4.199.60. Major Additions or Modifications to Pre-Existing Sites.
(01.)  MajorAdditions. If a major addition occurs on a property, all of the luminaires on the site shall
       comply with the requirements of this Section. For purposes of this sub-section, the following are
       considered to be major additions:
       A.     Additions of 50 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area,
              seatingcapacity,orparkingspaces,eitherwithasingleadditionorwithcumulativeadditions
              after July 2, 2008.

                                                            CD4:409
§ 4.199.60                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

        B.      Modificationorreplacementof 50percentormoreof theoutdoorlightingluminaries'within
                a five-year timeframe existing as of July 2, 2008.

                                           Table 7: Maximum Wattage And Required Shielding
             Lighting            Fully                  Shielded     Partly                                     Unshielded
             Zone                   Shielded                                Shielded
             LZ 1                       70                   20                   13          Lowvoltagelandscapelighting50watts
                                                                                                                    or less
             LZ 2                      100                  35                   39          Lowvoltagelandscapelighting50watts
                                                                                                                    or less
             LZ 3                      250                 100                  70          Landscape  and  facade  lighting  100
                                                                                             watts or less; ornamental lighting on
                                                                                                private drives of 39 watts and less
             LZ 4                      450                 150                 150         Landscape  and  facade  lighting  250
                                                                                             wattsorless;ornamentallightsonpri-
                                                                                             vate drives and lanterns 70 watts or
                                                                                             less; marquee lighting not employing
                                                                                                         medium based lamps

             Table 8: Maximum Lighting Mounting Height In Feet
             Lighting                          Lighting for private              Lighting for walk-                All other
             Zone                              drives, driveways,                ways, bikeways, plazas            lighting
                                               parking, bus stops and            and other pedestrian
                                               other transit facilities          areas
             LZ 0                               20                                   8                                     4
             LZ 1                               25                                   12                                   4
             LZ 2                               40                                   18                                   8
             LZ 3                               40                                   18                                   16
             LZ 4                               Height limit to be determined by Special Use Permit Only

                Lightingmountedontobuildingsorotherstructuresshallnotexceedamountingheightgreaterthanfourfeethigher
                than the tallest part of the building or structure at the place where the lighting is installed, nor higher than 33.33
                percentof the horizontal distance of the light from the nearestproperty line, whichever is less.

                                                                    CD4:410
                          PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                               § 4.199.60

                                             Table 9: Performance Method
                                             Maximum Light Level at Property Line
                      Maximum                Horizontal
                      percentage of          plane at grade         Vertical plane facing the site in question,
Lighting              direct uplight         (foot candles          from grade to mounting height of highest
Zone                  lumens                 fc)                    mounted luminaire (foot candles - fc)
LZ 0                  0                        0.01 fc               0.02 fc
LZ 1                  1%                     0.05 fc               0.1 fc
LZ 2                  5%                     0.2 fc                 0.4 fc
LZ 3                  10%                   0.4 fc                 0.8 fc
LZ 4                  20%                   0.8 fc                 1.6 fc

                                                     Table 10: Curfew
LightingZone                                                    CurfewTime
            LZ 0                                                        8:00 PM (2000 hours)
            LZ 1
            LZ 2                                                       10:00 PM (2200 hours)
            LZ 3
            LZ 4                                                  Midnight (2400 hours)

                                                     CD4:411
§ 4.199.60                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                                        Figure 30: Lighting Overlay Zone Map
(Ord. No. 649, 6-2-2008; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 688, 11-15-2010; Ord. No. 821, 7-2-2018)

                                                           CD4:412
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.202

                                               LAND DIVISIONS

Section  4.200. General—Purpose.

TheCityCouncilherebyfindsanddeemsthatitisreasonableandnecessary,inordertoaccomplishthe
orderlydevelopmentof landwithinthecorporatelimitsof theCity,andinordertopromotethepublic
health, safety and general welfare of the City, to enact these sections, to be hereinafter known as the
"Land Division Regulations of the City of Wilsonville, Oregon," in order to provide rules, regulations
andstandardstogoverntheapprovalof platsforsubdivisions,landpartitions,condominiumdivisions,
andplansforotherpropertydivisions,tocarryoutthedevelopmentpatternandplanof theCityandto
promotethepublichealth,safetyandgeneralwelfarethereof,andinordertolessencongestionof streets,
securesafetyfromfires,flood,pollutionandotherdangersandtoprovideadequatelightandarea,and
topreventovercrowdingof land,improveconnectivityfromonepartof thecommunitytoanother,and
to facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supplies, sewage, drainage, education, recre-
ationandotherneedsof thepeopleof theCity,andtoprescribeprocedurestobefollowedinsubmitting
plans and plats of land divisions for approval by the City.

Section  4.202. General—Authorization.

(.01)  Pursuant to ORS Chapter 92, plans and plats must be approved by the Planning Director or
      DevelopmentReviewBoard(Board),asspecifiedinSections4.030and4.031,beforeaplatforany
      landdivisionmaybefiledinthecountyrecordingofficeforanylandwithintheboundariesof the
      City,exceptthatthePlanningDirectorshallhaveauthoritytoapproveafinalplatthatisfoundto
      be substantially consistent with the tentative plat approved by the Board.

(.02)  The Development Review Board and Planning Director shall be given all the powers and duties
      withrespecttoproceduresandactionontentativeandfinalplans,platsandmapsof landdivisions
      specified in Oregon Revised Statutes and by this Code.

(.03)  ApprovalbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardorPlanningDirectorof divisionsof landwithinthe
      boundaries of the City, other than statutory subdivisions, is hereby required by virtue of the
      authority granted to the City in ORS 92.

(.04)  No person shall sell any lot or parcel in any condominium, subdivision, or land partition until a
      finalcondominium,subdivisionorpartitionplathasbeenapprovedbythePlanningDirectorasset
      forth in this Code and properly recorded with the appropriate county.

      A.     No development permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel that is not legally created in
             accordance with this Code.

      B.      Itshallbeaviolationof thisCodetodivideatractof landintoaparcelsmallerthanthelot
             size required in the Zoning Sections of  this Code unless specifically approved by the
             Development Review Board or City Council. No conveyance of any portion of a lot, for
             otherthanapublicuse,shallleaveastructureontheremainderof thelotwithlessthanthe
             minimum lot size, width, depth, frontage, yard or setback requirements, unless specifically
             authorizedthroughtheVarianceproceduresof Section4.196orthewaiverprovisionsof the
             Planned Development procedures of Section 4.118.

                                                     CD4:413
§ 4.202                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.05)  Expedited land divisions and Middle Housing land divisions, pursuant to ORS 197, shall be
      processed as provided in Section 4.232.

(.06)  New condominium developments shall be subject to the planned development procedures of
      Section 4.118 and the standards of Section 4.140.

(.07)  Condominium conversions shall be subject to the standards and procedures applicable to land
      divisions, and the following.

      A.     Upon application, formal notice shall be provided to tenants on the land and to adjacent
             landowners within 250 feet of the affected property. Not less than 30 days after the formal
             notice, a public hearing as set forth in Section 4.013 shall be held.

      B.      In the case of a conversion of apartments or rental units to condominiums, a minimum of
             120days'noticeshallbeaffordedanytenants,priortoconversion.Alltheprovisionsof the
             Oregon Revised Statutes shall be met, and a plat, together with a homeowners' association
             agreementandBy-Laws,shallbesubmittedforDevelopmentReviewBoardconsiderationas
             part of the public hearing process.

      C.     Theownerwillbeartheburdenof provingthatthereareanadequatenumberof vacantrental
             units available within Wilsonville, at approximately the same costs as the units that are
             proposed for conversion, to house those people who may be displaced as a result of the
             conversion.

(.08)  LotlineadjustmentsshallbesubjecttothestandardsandproceduresestablishedinSections4.233.
      In no case shall the boundaries between adjoining lots or parcels be altered without compliance
      with those standards.

Section  4.210. Application Procedure.

(.01)  Pre-applicationconference. Prior to submission of a tentative condominium, partition, or subdi-
      visionplat,apersonproposingtodividelandintheCityshallcontactthePlanningDepartmentto
      arrange a pre-application conference as set forth in Section 4.010.

      A.    PreparationofTentativePlat.ThePlanningstaff shallprovideinformationregardingproce-
             duresandgeneralinformationhavingadirectinfluenceontheproposeddevelopment,such
             as elements of the Comprehensive Plan, existing and proposed streets, roads and public
             utilities.Theapplicantshallcausetobepreparedatentativeplat,togetherwithimprovement
             plansandothersupplementarymaterialasspecifiedinthisSection.TheTentativePlatshall
             bepreparedbyanOregonlicensedprofessionallandsurveyororengineer.Anaffidavitof the
             services of such surveyor or engineer shall be furnished as part of the submittal.

      B.    Tentative Plat Submission. The purpose of the Tentative Plat is to present a study of the
             proposed subdivision to the Planning Department and Development Review Board and to
             receive approval or recommendations for revisions before preparation of a final Plat. The

                                                       CD4:414
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.210

              design and layout of this plan plat shall meet the guidelines and requirements set forth in this
              Code. The Tentative Plat shall be submitted to the Planning Department with the following
              information:
              1.      Site development application form completed and signed by the owner of the land or a
                     letter of authorization signed by the owner. A preliminary title report or other proof of
                     ownership is to be included with the application form.
              2.      Application fees as established by resolution of the City Council.
              3.      Ten copies and one sepia or suitable reproducible tracing of the Tentative Plat shall be
                     submitted with the application. Paper size shall be 18 inch by 24 inch, or such other size
                     as may be specified by the City Engineer.
              4.      Name of the subdivision. No subdivision name shall duplicate or resemble the name of
                     any other subdivision in Clackamas or Washington County. Names may be checked
                     through the county offices.
              5.      Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owners and applicants, and engineer
                     or surveyor.
              6.      Date, north point and scale of drawing.
              7.      Location of the subject property by Section, Township, and Range.
              8.      Legal road access to subject property shall be indicated as City, County, or other public
                     roads.
              9.      Vicinity map showing the relationship to the nearest major highway or street.
              10.    Lots. Dimensions of all lots, minimum lot size, average lot size, and proposed lot and
                     block numbers.
              11.    Gross acreage in proposed plat.
              12.    Proposed uses of  the property, including sites, if  any, for multi-family dwellings,
                     shopping centers, churches, industries, parks, and playgrounds or other public or
                     semi-public uses.
              13.    Improvements: Statement of  the improvements to be made or installed including
                     streets, private drives, sidewalks, lighting, tree planting, and times such improvements
                     are to be made or completed.
              14.    Trees. Locations, types, sizes, and general conditions of all existing trees, as required in
                     Section 4.600.
              15.    Utilities such as electrical, gas, telephone, on and abutting the tract.
              16.    Easements: Approximate width, location, and purpose of all existing and proposed
                     easements on, and known easements abutting the tract.
              17.    Deed Restrictions. Outline of proposed deed restrictions, if any.
              18.    Written Statement. Information which is not practical to be shown on the maps may be
                     shown in separate statements accompanying the Tentative Plat.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:415
§ 4.210                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              19.    If the subdivision is to be a "Planned Development," a copy of the proposed Home
                     Owners Association By-Laws must be submitted at the time of submission of the
                     application. The Tentative Plat shall be considered as the Stage I Preliminary Plan. The
                     proposed By-Laws must address the maintenance of any parks, common areas, or
                     facilities.
              20.    Any plat bordering a stream or river shall indicate areas subject to flooding and shall
                     comply with the provisions of Section 4.172.
              21.    Proposed use or treatment of any property designated as open space by the City of
                     Wilsonville.
              22.    A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within 250 feet of the
                     subject property, printed on self-adhesive mailing labels. The list shall be taken from the
                     latest available property ownership records of the Assessor's office of the affected
                     county.
              23.    A completed "liens and assessments" form, provided by the City Finance Department.
              24.    Locations of all areas designated as a Significant Resource Overlay Zone by the City, as
                     well as any wetlands shall be shown on the tentative plat.
              25.    Locations of all existing and proposed utilities, including but not limited to domestic
                     water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and any private utilities crossing or intended to
                     serve the site. Any plans to phase the construction or use of utilities shall be indicated.
              26.    A traffic study, prepared under contract with the City, shall be submitted as part of the
                     tentative plat application process, unless specifically waived by the Community Devel-
                     opment Director.

       C.     Action on proposed tentative plat:
              1.      Consideration of tentative subdivision plat. The Development Review Board shall
                     consider the tentative plat and the reports of City staff and other agencies at a regular
                     Board meeting no more than 90days after tentative plat application has been accepted
                     as complete by the City. Final action on the proposed tentative plat shall occur within
                     the time limits specified in Section 4.013. The tentative plat shall be approved if the
                     Development Review Board determines that the tentative plat conforms in all respects
                     to the requirements of this Code.
              2.      Consideration of  tentative partition plat. The Planning Director shall review and
                     consider any proposed land partition plat through the procedures for Administrative
                     Reviews specified in Section 4.030 and 4.035.
              3.      The Board shall, by Resolution, adopt its decision, together with findings and a list of
                     all Conditions of Approval or required changes to be reflected on the Final Plat.
              4.      Limitations on Deed Restrictions. The City may limit content of deed restrictions in
                     order to promote local, regional and state interests in affordable housing and/or comply
                     with applicable statute, rules and policies; the Board may limit the content that will be
                     accepted within proposed deed restrictions or covenants. In adopting conditions of

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:416
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.220

                     approval for a residential land division, the Board or Planning Director may prohibit
                     such things as mandatory minimum construction costs, minimum unit sizes, prohibi-
                     tions of  manufactured housing, etc. The City shall, in all cases, ensure no deed
                     restrictions or covenants limit construction of any housing allowed by City zoning for
                     the subject land.
              5.      Effect of Approval. After approval of a tentative plat, the applicant may proceed with
                     final surveying, improvement construction and preparation of the final plat. Approval
                     shall be effective for a period of two years, and if the final plat is not submitted to the
                     Planning Department within such time, the tentative plat shall be submitted again and
                     the entire procedure shall be repeated for consideration of any changed conditions
                     which may exist. Except, however, that the Development Review Board may grant a
                     time extension as provided in Section 4.023.

       D.     Land division phases to be shown. Where the applicant intends to develop the land in phases,
              the schedule of such phasing shall be presented for review at the time of the tentative plat. In
              acting on an application for tentative plat approval, the Planning Director or Development
              Review Board may set time limits for the completion of the phasing schedule which, if not
              met, shall result in an expiration of the tentative plat approval.
       E.     Remainder tracts to be shown as lots or parcels. Tentative plats shall clearly show all affected
              property as part of the application for land division. All remainder tracts, regardless of size,
              shall be shown and counted among the parcels or lots of the division.

       F.      Replats subject to same procedures as new plats. Proposals to replat any previously platted
              land shall be subject to the same standards and procedures as a new application for tentative
              plat approval. Except, however, that a replat that proposes the same number of lots or parcels
              as the originally recorded land division, and that is determined by the Planning Director to
              create no significant adverse impacts on adjacent properties beyond that of the original
              division, may be reviewed through Class II Administrative Review procedures.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Section  4.220.  Final Plat Review.

(.01)  Submission of the Paper Plat. Prior to submitting the Final Plat as required in subsection "(.02),"
       below, the applicant shall submit a Paper Plat to the City Engineer for review. Comments of the
       City Engineer, Planning Director, and Community Development Director shall be conveyed in
       writing to the County Surveyor of the County where the final plat is to be recorded.

(.02)  Submission of the Final Plat. Any time within two years after approval of the tentative plat, the
       applicant shall have the subject property, or any part thereof, surveyed and the final plat prepared
       in conformance with the approved tentative plat. When the final plat is in order, the applicant will
       submit the following items to the City offices for final approval of the plat.

       A.     Plat board, tracing, and five full-sized blueprint copies of the plat.

       B.      The signatures of owner(s), surveyor or engineer shall all be properly acknowledged by a
              notary public. All signatures shall be signed in India ink.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:417
§ 4.220                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       C.     Deed restrictions. A copy of  all protective deed restrictions proposed for the area shall
              accompany the final Plat and specifications of all easements and dedications as required by
              the Development Review Board. The Planning Director shall not sign the final plat if the
              proposed deed restrictions fail to provide for the on-going maintenance of common areas
              violate established conditions of approval for the development, or violate other statutes, rules
              or standards the City has responsibility to enforce, including those related to not allowing
              deeds or covenants to limit housing types allowed by the City's zoning for a given property(ies).

       D.     Approval of agreement certified for all required improvements as follows:

              1.      Improvements as required by conditions of  approval have been completed, and a
                     certificate of such fact has been filed with the Planning Director by the City Engineer;
                     or

              2.      A performance agreement and completion bond has been filed with the City Recorder
                     in sufficient amount to ensure the completion of all required improvements.

(.03)  Review of Final Plat. Upon receipt of a complete Final Plat, together with the required fee, the Plat
       and other required information shall be reviewed as follows:

       A.     The Planning Director and Community Development Director shall examine the Plat and
              supplementary materials to determine that the subdivision or partition, as shown, is substan-
              tially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative plat and that there has been
              compliance with provisions of State Law and this Ordinance.

       B.      The County Surveyor, or such other professional land surveyor as shall be selected by the
              City to perform such work, shall check the site and plat and shall take such measurements
              and make such computations as are necessary to determine that the plat is correct, and that
              all requirements of State Law and this Ordinance are met.

       C.     The Community Development Director shall not sign any plat which does not indicate the
              marking with monuments of the intersections of all streets and the centerlines of all streets at
              every point of curvature and point of tangent. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
              to provide such Monumentation within the land division prior to the issuance of  any
              Building permit for construction within the subject property.

(.04)  Action on Final Plat. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete final plat submittal, the Planning
       Director shall approve, deny, or, when further information is required, postpone a decision on the
       application. Written notice of  such action shall be mailed to the applicant by the Planning
       Director. If the Planning Director determines that full conformity with all applicable ordinances
       has not been made, the Director shall advise the applicant of the changes or additions that must be
       made and shall afford the applicant an opportunity to make the necessary changes or additions.

       A.     A final plat shall be approved only if affirmative findings can be made that:

              1.      The Plat is in substantial conformance with the provisions of the Preliminary Plat, as
                     approved;

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:418
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.220

              2.      The proposal is consistent with the provisions, intents and purposes of the Compre-
                     hensive Plan, Zoning Regulations and the requirements of other relevant sections of
                     this Code.
              3.      Streets, roads and alleys for public use are dedicated without any reservation or
                     restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and
                     easements for public utilities
              4.      The plat contains a donation to the public of all common improvements, including, but
                     not limited to, streets, roads, parks, sewage disposal and water supply systems, the
                     donation of which is required by Ordinance or was made a condition of the approval of
                     the tentative plat for the development.
              5.      Explanations of all common improvements to remain in private ownership have been
                     accounted for and referenced on the plat;
              6.      Private drives indicated on the tentative plat have been approved by the City; and
              7.      All conditions of approval for the development have been met, or adequate assurances
                     for their completion have been provided, to the satisfaction of the Community Devel-
                     opment Director.
       B.      If affirmative findings cannot be made with regard to all of the above criteria, the Planning
              Director shall not approve the final plat.

       C.     If approved, such approval shall be evidenced by the signature on the plat of the Planning
              Director together with the date of approval. In the event of denial, the Planning Director
              shall cause written notice and the reasons for denial to be furnished to the applicant.

(.05)  Appeal of the Planning Director's Decision. A decision made by the Planning Director to deny a
       final plat application may be appealed by the applicant as provided in Section 4.022.

(.06)  Effect of Approval. Approval shall be effective for a period of 90 days, and if the final plat is not
       offered for record by the applicant in the office of the County Clerk within such time, the final plat
       shall be submitted again to the Planning Director under Section 4.220 of this Code, and the entire
       procedure shall be repeated, for consideration of any conditions which may then exist.

(.07)  Delivery of Final Plat to County Offices. Following the approval of the Planning Director:
       A.     Unless otherwise specified by the county where the final plat is to be recorded, the final plat
              shall be routed to the county departments as follows:
              1.      The Assessor shall receive the final plat and may research the needed requirements as
                     well as forward identification information to the Tax Department.
              2.      Obtain on the final plat the signature of the County Surveyor, whose signature shall
                     certify that the platting laws of this State have been met.
              3.      Obtain the signature on the final plat of a majority of the Board of County Commis-
                     sioners whose signatures shall certify that the plat is approved by them.
              4.      Obtain the signature on the final plat of the County Tax Department if/or when all
                     taxes on the property are paid.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:419
§ 4.220                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              5.      Obtain on the final plat the signature of the County Assessor, whose signature shall
                     certify that ownership is correct and taxes have been pro-rated and collected, if plat is
                     to be recorded after July 1.
              6.      After the above items have been completed, the final plat shall be delivered to the office
                     of the County Clerk and required fees paid for recordation.

(.08)  Recording Final Plat. In addition to the requirements authorized and provided in ORS 92, upon
       offering the final plat for recordation, the subdivider shall furnish one black line or blue print copy
       of the final plat to the City Engineer and to such County offices as may be requested or required by
       the County.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Section  4.232.  Expedited Land Divisions and Middle Housing Land Divisions.

(.01)  Applicants for subdivisions or land partitions may request that their applications be processed as
       expedited land divisions, pursuant to ORS 197. In order to be processed as an expedited land
       division, each such request must be filed in writing at the time that the application is filed.

(.02)  Additional to the relevant standards and criteria applying to partitions and subdivisions, appli-
       cations for expedited land divisions shall only be approved where the subject property is in a
       residential zone and the application includes no requests for waivers or variances from the
       standards applying to land divisions in the zone.

(.03)  An applicant for a land division may process the land division as a Middle Housing land division
       if all the following are met:

       A.     The proposed land division is occupied by Middle Housing or an Accessory Dwelling Unit
              and the associated primary dwelling;

       B.      Separate utilities are provided for each dwelling unit within the land division;

       C.     Easements are provided for each dwelling unit for:
              1.      Locating, accessing, replacing and servicing all utilities;
              2.      Pedestrian access from each dwelling unit to a street or private drive;
              3.      Any common areas or shared building elements;
              4.      Any dedicated driveways or parking; and
              5.      Any dedicated common area.

       D.     Evidence demonstrates how buildings or structures on a resulting middle housing land
              division unit will comply with applicable building codes provisions relating to new property
              lines and, notwithstanding the creation of new middle housing land division units, how
              structures or buildings located on the newly created middle housing land division units will
              comply with the Oregon residential specialty code.

       E.     Notes are added to the final plat indicating the following:
              1.      Further division of the resulting middle housing land division units is prohibited;

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:420
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                 § 4.232

             2.      The approval of the middle housing land division is pursuant to ORS 92.010 to 92.192,
                   as applicable.

Supp. No. 5                                         CD4:420.1

                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                   § 4.232

      F.      The Middle Housing Land Division is not used to create separate units of land for a two,
             three, or four-Unit Cluster Housing development on either of the following:
             1.      On land otherwise divisible through a partition or subdivision to create lots for
                    detached single-family homes; or
             2.      On lots in subdivisions or partitions recorded in the prior 24 month period unless the
                    averagesizeof theresultinglanddivisionunits,determinedbyaddingtheareasof land
                    divisionunitsanddividingbythenumberof landdivisionunits,is60percentorlessof
                    the minimum lot size in the zone.

(.04)  Provisions of Middle Housing Land Divisions:
      1.      A Middle Housing Land Division creates separate units of land for each dwelling unit in a
             MiddleHousingdevelopmentthatcouldotherwisebebuiltonthelotwithoutalanddivision
             or to create a separate unit of land for an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
      2.      Following a Middle Housing Land Division, the units of land resulting from a Middle
             HousingLandDivisionshallcollectivelybeconsideredasinglelot,alongwiththeparentlot,
             for all but platting and property transfer purposes under City code and state rules and
             statutes, including, but not limited to, the following purposes:
             A.     Lot standards such as size, setback, lot coverage, and lot width and depth;
             B.      Definitionof unittypes(e.g.,atwo-UnitClusterHousingdevelopmentwhereeachunit
                    isonitsownlanddivisionunitthroughaMiddleHousingLandDivisionwouldstillbe
                    considered two-Unit Cluster Housing rather than single-family units; a duplex would
                    still be considered a duplex rather than townhouses);
             C.     Allowance of number of Middle Housing units and Accessory Dwelling Units;
             D.     Compliance with Middle Housing rules and statutes in ORS 197 and OAR 660-046.

      3.      Middle Housing Land Division Units, the units of land resulting from a Middle Housing
             Division, shall:
             A.     Have exactly one dwelling unit (except for tracts for common space), and
             B.      Not be further divisible.

(.05)  ProceduresandRequirementsforExpeditedLandDivisionsandMiddleHousingLandDivisions.
      A.     Expedited Land Divisions and Middle Housing Land Divisions for new middle housing,
             shallbesubjecttothesameproceduresandrequirementsasconventionallanddivisions,with
             the following exceptions:
             1.      The Planning Director shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
                    deny tentative plat applications through the Administrative Review procedures of
                    Section4.035.TheDirectorshallnotreferanapplicationforanexpeditedlanddivision
                    to the Development Review Board for hearing and the Board shall not have the
                    authority to call up the decision of the Director for review.
             2.      TheDirectorshallrenderadecisiononanexpeditedlanddivisionwithin30daysof a
                    complete filing, unless a time extension has been requested by the applicant.

Supp. No. 2                                            CD4:421
§ 4.232                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.      Appealsof thedecisionsof theDirectoronexpeditedlanddivisionsshallbeheardby
                    arefereewhohasbeenretainedbytheCityforthepurposeof consideringsuchappeals.
                    Decisionsof therefereeshallbefinalandtheCityCouncilshallnothavetheauthority
                    to call up such decisions for review.
             4.      Therefereeshallrenderadecisiononanexpeditedlanddivisionormiddlehousingland
                    division appeal within 63 days of a complete filing, unless a time extension has been
                    requested by the applicant.
      B.      Middle Housing Land Division occupied by existing middle housing or an Accessory
             Dwelling Unit and the associated primary dwelling shall be subject to the same procedures
             and requirements as partitions.
      C.     ForeitherprocessdescribedinA.andB.,anapplicantmaysubmitmultipletentativemiddle
             housing land divisions within the same recorded subdivision or partition plat as a single
             application.
      D.     Notwithstanding Subsections A. and B. above, an applicant may elect to have one or more
             tentative middle housing land divisions reviewed concurrently with the tentative plat of a
             subdivision subject to review by the Development Review Board. Such tentative middle
             housinglanddivisionsshallbeshownonseparatesheet(s)thanthetentativesubdivisionplat
             and be clearly identified as being created from one or more lots created by the subdivision.

Section  4.233. Lot Line Adjustments.

(.01)  Property owners wishing to alter the location of a property line that separates adjoining proper-
      ties, without creating a new lot or parcel in the process, may apply for approval of a lot line
      adjustment.Applicationsforlotlineadjustmentshallbeprocessedthrougheitherof thefollowing:
      A.     Administrative Review, through the procedures outlined in Section 4.035; or
      B.      As part of a partition or subdivision process, where new lots or parcels are being created at
             the same time as the existing lot lines are being reconfigured.

(.02)  The lots or parcels resulting from a lot line adjustment shall conform to all requirements of the
      zone.Except,however,if eitherof thesubjectpropertiesisalegalnon-conforminglotatthetime
      of the application, the requirements of Section 4.192 (Non-Conforming Lots) shall be followed.

(.03)  Thededicationof propertytoaunitof government,wherethepropertybeingdedicatedisadded
      to property that is already in public ownership, may be completed by deed without requiring
      compliance with this Section.

Section  4.236. General Requirements—Streets.

(.01)  ConformitytotheTransportationSystemPlan.Landdivisionsshallconformtoandbeinharmony
      withtheTransportationSystemsPlan,theBicycleandPedestrianMasterPlan,andtheParksand
      Recreation Master Plan.

Supp. No. 2                                            CD4:422
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.236

(.02)  RelationtoAdjoiningStreetSystem:

      A.     A land division shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets existing in the
             adjoiningarea,orof theirproperprojectionwhenadjoiningpropertyisnotdeveloped,and
             shall be of a width not less than the minimum requirements for streets set forth in these
             regulations.Where,intheopinionof thePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoard,
             topographic conditions make such continuation or conformity impractical, an exception
             maybemade.IncaseswheretheBoardorPlanningCommissionhasadoptedaplanorplat
             of aneighborhoodorareaof whichtheproposedlanddivisionisapart,thesubdivisionshall
             conform to such adopted neighborhood or area plan.

      B.      Where the plat submitted covers only a part of  the applicant's tract, a sketch of  the
             prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street
             systemof thepartsubmittedshallbeconsideredinthelightof adjustmentsandconnections
             with the street system of the part not submitted.

      C.     AtanytimewhenanapplicantproposesalanddivisionandtheComprehensivePlanwould
             allowfortheproposedlotstobefurtherdivided,theCitymayrequireanarrangementof lots
             andstreetssuchastopermitalaterresubdivisioninconformitytothestreetplansandother
             requirements specified in these regulations.

(.03)  AllstreetsshallconformtothestandardssetforthinSection4.177andtheblocksizerequirements
      of the zone.

(.04)  Creation of Easements. The Planning Director or Development Review Board may approve an
      easement to be established without full compliance with these regulations, provided such an
      easement is the only reasonable method by which a portion of  a lot large enough to allow
      partitioning into two parcels may be provided with vehicular access and adequate utilities. If the
      proposed lot is large enough to divide into more than two parcels, a street dedication may be
      required.

(.05)  Topography. The layout of streets shall give suitable recognition to surrounding topographical
      conditions in accordance with the purpose of these regulations.

(.06)  ReserveStrips.ThePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoardmayrequiretheapplicantto
      create a reserve strip controlling the access to a street. Said strip is to be placed under the
      jurisdiction of the City Council, when the Director or Board determine that a strip is necessary:

      A.     Topreventaccesstoabuttinglandattheendof astreetinordertoassuretheproperextension
             of the street pattern and the orderly development of land lying beyond the street; or

      B.      Topreventaccesstothesideof astreetonthesidewhereadditionalwidthisrequiredtomeet
             the right-of-way standards established by the City; or

      C.     To prevent access to land abutting a street of the land division but not within the tract or
             parcel of land being divided; or

      D.     To prevent access to land unsuitable for building development.

                                                      CD4:423
§ 4.236                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.07)  Future Expansion of Street. When necessary to give access to, or permit a satisfactory future
      divisionof,adjoiningland,streetsshallbeextendedtotheboundaryof thelanddivisionandthe
      resultingdead-endstreetmaybeapprovedwithoutaturn-around.Reservestripsandstreetplugs
      shallberequiredtopreservetheobjectiveof streetextension.Notificationthatthestreetisplanned
      for future extension shall be posted on the stub street.

(.08)  ExistingStreets. Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a tract are of inadequate width,
      additionalright-of-wayshallconformtothedesignatedwidthinthisCodeorintheTransportation
      Systems Plan.

(.09)  StreetNames.Nostreetnameswillbeusedwhichwillduplicateorbeconfusedwiththenamesof
      existingstreets,exceptforextensionsof existingstreets.Streetnamesandnumbersshallconformto
      theestablishednamesystemintheCity,andshallbesubjecttotheapprovalof theCityEngineer.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010; Ord. No. 719, 6-17-2013)

Section  4.237. General Requirements—Other.

(.01)  Blocks:

      A.     The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be designed with due regard to providing
             adequate building sites for the use contemplated, consideration of needs for convenient
             access, circulation, control, and safety of pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle traffic, and
             recognition of limitations and opportunities of topography.

      B.      Sizes: Blocks shall not exceed the sizes and lengths specified for the zone in which they are
             located unless topographical conditions or other physical constraints necessitate larger
             blocks.Largerblocksshallonlybeapprovedwherespecificfindingsaremadejustifyingthe
             size, shape, and configuration.

(.02)  Easements:

      A.     Utilitylines.Easementsforsanitaryorstormsewers,drainage,watermains,electricallinesor
             other public utilities shall be dedicated wherever necessary. Easements shall be provided
             consistent with the City's Public Works Standards, as specified by the City Engineer or
             Planning Director. All of the public utility lines within and adjacent to the site shall be
             installedwithinthepublicright-of-wayoreasement;withundergroundservicesextendingto
             the private parcel constructed in conformance to the City's Public Works Standards. All
             franchise utilities shall be installed within a public utility easement. All utilities shall have
             appropriate easements for construction and maintenance purposes.

      B.    Watercourses.Wherealanddivisionistraversedbyawatercourse,drainageway,channelor
             stream,thereshallbeprovidedastormwatereasementordrainageright-of-wayconforming
             substantiallywiththelinesof thewatercourse,andsuchfurtherwidthaswillbeadequatefor
             the purposes of conveying storm water and allowing for maintenance of the facility or
             channel. Streets or parkways parallel to water courses may be required.

                                                       CD4:424
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.237

(.03)  Pedestrianandbicyclepathways. An improved public pathway shall be required to transverse the
      block near its middle if that block exceeds the length standards of the zone in which it is located.
      A.     Pathways shall be required to connect to culs-de-sac or to pass through unusually shaped
             blocks.
      B.      Pathwaysrequiredbythissubsectionshallhaveaminimumwidthof tenfeetunlesstheyare
             foundtobeunnecessaryforbicycletraffic,inwhichcasetheyaretohaveaminimumwidth
             of six feet.

(.04)  Treeplanting.TreeplantingplansforalanddivisionmustbesubmittedtothePlanningDirector
      and receive the approval of the Director or Development Review Board before the planting is
      begun. Easements or other documents shall be provided, guaranteeing the City the right to enter
      the site and plant, remove, or maintain approved street trees that are located on private property.

(.05)  LotSizeandshape.Thelotsize,width,shapeandorientationshallbeappropriateforthelocation
      of the land division and for the type of development and use contemplated. Lots shall meet the
      requirements of the zone where they are located.
      A.     In areas that are not served by public sewer, an on-site sewage disposal permit is required
             fromtheCity.If thesoilstructureisadversetoon-sitesewagedisposal,nodevelopmentshall
             be permitted until sewer service can be provided.
      B.      Wherepropertyiszonedordeededforbusinessorindustrialuse,otherlotwidthsandareas
             may be permitted at the discretion of the Development Review Board. Depth and width of
             properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to
             provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of  use and
             development contemplated.
      C.     In approving an application for a Planned Development, the Development Review Board
             maywaivetherequirementsof thissectionandlotsize,shape,anddensityshallconformto
             the Planned Development conditions of approval.

(.06)  Access.Thedivisionof landshallbesuchthateachlotshallhaveaminimumfrontageonastreet
      orprivatedrive,asspecifiedinthestandardsof therelativezoningdistricts.Thisminimumfrontage
      requirement shall apply with the following exceptions:

      A.     Alotontheouterradiusof acurvedstreetortractwithaprivatedrive,orfacingthecircular
             end of a cul-de-sac shall have frontage of not less than 25 feet upon a street or tract with a
             private drive, measured on the arc.

      B.      TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmaywaivelotfrontagerequirementswhereinitsjudgment
             the waiver of frontage requirements will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
             purpose of this regulation or if the Board determines that another standard is appropriate
             because of the characteristics of the overall development.

(.07)  Through lots. Through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of
      residential development from major traffic arteries or adjacent non-residential activity or to
      overcomespecificdisadvantagesof topographyandorientation.Aplantingscreeneasementof at
      leasttenfeet,acrosswhichthereshallbenoaccess,mayberequiredalongthelineof lotsabutting

                                                      CD4:425
§ 4.237                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      suchatrafficarteryorotherdisadvantageoususe.Throughlotswithplantingscreensshallhavea
      minimumaveragedepthof 100feet.TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmayrequireassurancethat
      such screened areas be maintained as specified in Section 4.176.

(.08)  Lot side lines. The side lines of  lots, as far as practicable for the purpose of  the proposed
      development,shallrunatrightanglestothestreetortractwithaprivatedriveuponwhichthelots
      face.

(.09)  Largelotlanddivisions.Individingtractswhichatsomefuturetimearelikelytobere-divided,the
      locationof lotlinesandotherdetailsof thelayoutshallbesuchthatre-divisionmayreadilytake
      place without violating the requirements of these regulations and without interfering with the
      orderlydevelopmentof streets.Restrictionof buildingswithinfuturestreetlocationsshallbemade
      a matter of record if the Development Review Board considers it necessary.

(.10)  Buildingline.ThePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoardmayestablishspecialbuilding
      setbacks to allow for the future redivision or other development of the property or for other
      reasons specified in the findings supporting the decision. If special building setback lines are
      established for the land division, they shall be shown on the final plat.
(.11)  Build-toline.ThePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoardmayestablishspecialbuild-to
      linesforthedevelopment,asspecifiedinthefindingsandconditionsof approvalforthedecision.
      If specialbuild-tolinesareestablishedforthelanddivision,theyshallbeshownonthefinalplat.

(.12)  Land for public purposes. The Planning Director or Development Review Board may require
      propertytobereservedforpublicacquisition,orirrevocablyofferedfordedication,foraspecified
      period of time.

(.13)  Cornerlots. Lots on street intersections shall have a corner radius of not less than ten feet.
(Ord. No. 682, 9-9-2010)

Section  4.250. Lots of Record.

All lots of  record that have been legally created prior to the adoption of  this ordinance shall be
considered to be legal lots. Tax lots created by the County Assessor are not necessarily legal lots of
record.

Section  4.260. Improvements—Procedures.

In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by the developer, either as a requirement of
these regulations or at the developer's own option, shall conform to the requirements of this Code and
improvementstandardsandspecificationsof theCity.Theimprovementsshallbeinstalledinaccordance
with the City's Public Works Standards.

Section  4.262. Improvements—Requirements.

(.01)  Streets.Streetswithinorpartiallywithinthedevelopmentshallbegradedfortheentireright-of-
      waywidth,constructedandsurfacedinaccordancewiththeTransportationSystemsPlanandCity
      PublicWorksStandards.Existingstreetswhichabutthedevelopmentshallbegraded,constructed,
      reconstructed, surfaced or repaired as determined by the City Engineer.

                                                      CD4:426
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.264

(.02)  Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with standards adopted by the City.

(.03)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with standards adopted by the City.

(.04)  Sanitary sewers. When the development is within 200 feet of  an existing public sewer main,
      sanitarysewersshallbeinstalledtoserveeachlotorparcelinaccordancewithstandardsadopted
      by the City. When the development is more than 200 feet from an existing public sewer main, the
      City Engineer may approve an alternate sewage disposal system.

(.05)  Drainage. Storm drainage, including detention or retention systems, shall be provided as deter-
      mined by the City Engineer.

(.06)  Underground utility and service facilities. All new utilities shall be subject to the standards of
      Section4.300(UndergroundUtilities).Thedevelopershallmakeallnecessaryarrangementswith
      theservingutilitytoprovidetheundergroundservicesinconformancewiththeCity'sPublicWorks
      Standards.

(.07)  Streetlight standards. Streetlight standards shall be installed in accordance with regulations
      adopted by the City.

(.08)  Streetsigns.Streetnamesignsshallbeinstalledatallstreetintersectionsanddead-endsignsatthe
      entrancetoalldead-endstreetsandculs-de-sacinaccordancewithstandardsadoptedbytheCity.
      Other signs may be required by the City Engineer.

(.09)  Monuments.Monumentsshallbeplacedatalllotandblockcorners,anglepoints,pointsof curves
      instreets,atintermediatepointsandshallbeof suchmaterial,sizeandlengthasrequiredbyState
      Law.Anymonumentsthataredisturbedbeforeallimprovementsarecompletedbythedeveloper
      and accepted by the City shall be replaced to conform to the requirements of State Law.

(.10)  Water. Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed to serve each lot in accordance with City
      standards.

Section  4.264. Improvements—Assurance.

(.01)  AcertificateshallbesignedbytheCityEngineercertifyingthatthedeveloperhascompliedwith
      one of the following alternatives:

      A.     All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regula-
             tions and with the action of the Planning Director or Development Review Board, giving
             conditional approval of the preliminary plat, or
      B.      Abondorotherformof securitysatisfactorytotheCommunityDevelopmentDirectorora
             certified check, equal to one and one-half times the City Engineer's estimate of the cost of
             such improvement, has been posted with the City to assure completion of  all required
             improvements, or

      C.     Deed restriction to the effect that no lots may be sold until improvements have been
             completedandacceptedbytheCity,abondorothersecuritysatisfactorytotheCityCouncil
             or a certified check is posted, or other means approved by the Community Development
             Director, giving full assurance that the improvements will be completed.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:427
§ 4.264                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

      D.     If, at the termination of two years, the work has not been completed, and no extension has
             beengranted,thecertifiedcheckorbondmaybeforfeitedandtheimprovementsconstructed
             atthedirectionof theCityEngineer.If theworkhasbeencompletedtothesatisfactionof the
             City Engineer, the certified check or bond shall be released.

Section  4.270. Variance from Land Division Standards.

(.01)  TheDevelopmentReviewBoardmayauthorizeavariancefromanyrequirementsetforthinthese
      standards, based upon the procedures, standards and criteria listed in Section 4.196, and the
      additional standards listed below.

(.02)  The basic reason for granting a variance will be proof that:
      A.     Special conditions or circumstances unique to the property under consideration make the
             variance necessary.

      B.      Thevarianceisnecessaryfortheproperdevelopmentof thelanddivisionandthepreserva-
             tion of property rights and values.
      C.     Thevariancewillnotatpresentorhereafterbedetrimentaltothepublicwelfareorinjurious
             to other properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed land division.

(.03)  Considerationforavariancefromtheseregulationsshallbebaseduponawrittenstatementbythe
      applicant giving complete details of conditions and reasons why a variance should be granted.

Section  4.280. Appeals.

Appeals may be made as set forth in Section 4.022.

Section  4.290. Penalties.

Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this Code shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 4.026 (Enforcement).

                                          UNDERGROUND UTILITIES

Section  4.300. General.

(.01)  The City Council deems it reasonable and necessary in order to accomplish the orderly and
      desirabledevelopmentof landwithinthecorporatelimitsof theCity,torequiretheunderground
      installation of utilities in all new developments.

(.02)  Aftertheeffectivedateof thisCode,theapprovalof anydevelopmentof landwithintheCitywill
      beupontheexpressconditionthatallnewutilitylines,includingbutnotlimitedtothoserequired
      forpower,communication,streetlighting,gas,cabletelevisionservicesandrelatedfacilities,shall
      be placed underground.

(.03)  The construction of underground utilities shall be subject to the City's Public Works Standards
      and shall meet applicable requirements for erosion control and other environmental protection.

Supp. No. 1                                            CD4:428
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.400

Section  4.310  Exceptions.

Section 4.300 of this Code shall not apply to surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connec-
tion boxes, wireless communication facilities, and meter cabinets and other appurtenances which are
reasonably necessary to be placed above ground, or to temporary utility service facilities during
construction, or to high capacity electric and communication feeder lines, or to utility transmission lines
operating at 50,000 volts or more.

Section  4.320.  Requirements.

(.01)  The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for and make all necessary arrangements with the
       serving utility to provide the underground services (including cost of rearranging any existing
       overhead facilities). All such underground facilities as described shall be constructed in compliance
       with the rules and regulations of the Public Utility Commission of the State of Oregon relating to
       the installation and safety of underground lines, plant, system, equipment and apparatus.

(.02)  The location of the buried facilities shall conform to standards supplied to the subdivider by the
       City. The City also reserves the right to approve location of all surface-mounted transformers.

(.03)  Interior easements (back lot lines) will only be used for storm or sanitary sewers, and front
       easements will be used for other utilities unless different locations are approved by the City
       Engineer. Easements satisfactory to the serving utilities shall be provided by the developer and
       shall be set forth on the plat.

                                                  SITE DESIGN REVIEW

Section  4.400.  Purpose.

(.01)  Excessive uniformity, inappropriateness or poor design of the exterior appearance of structures
       and signs and the lack of proper attention to site development and landscaping in the business,
       commercial, industrial and certain residential areas of the City hinders the harmonious develop-
       ment of the City, impairs the desirability of residence, investment or occupation in the City, limits
       the opportunity to attain the optimum use in value and improvements, adversely affects the
       stability and value of property, produces degeneration of property in such areas and with attendant
       deterioration of conditions affecting the peace, health and welfare, and destroys a proper relation-
       ship between the taxable value of property and the cost of municipal services therefor.

(.02)  The City Council declares that the purposes and objectives of site development requirements and
       the site design review procedure are to:

       A.     Assure that Site Development Plans are designed in a manner that insures proper functioning
              of the site and maintains a high quality visual environment.

       B.      Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including
              the architecture, landscaping and graphic design of said development;

       C.     Discourage monotonous, drab, unsightly, dreary and inharmonious developments;

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:429
§ 4.400                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       D.     Conserve the City's natural beauty and visual character and charm by assuring that struc-
              tures, signs and other improvements are properly related to their sites, and to surrounding
              sites and structures, with due regard to the aesthetic qualities of the natural terrain and
              landscaping, and that proper attention is given to exterior appearances of structures, signs
              and other improvements;

       E.     Protect and enhance the City's appeal and thus support and stimulate business and industry
              and promote the desirability of investment and occupancy in business, commercial and
              industrial purposes;

       F.      Stabilize and improve property values and prevent blighted areas and, thus, increase tax
              revenues;

       G.     Insure that adequate public facilities are available to serve development as it occurs and that
              proper attention is given to site planning and development so as to not adversely impact the
              orderly, efficient and economic provision of public facilities and services.

       H.     Achieve the beneficial influence of pleasant environments for living and working on behav-
              ioral patterns and, thus, decrease the cost of governmental services and reduce opportunities
              for crime through careful consideration of physical design and site layout under defensible
              space guidelines that clearly define all areas as either public, semi-private, or private, provide
              clear identity of structures and opportunities for easy surveillance of the site that maximize
              resident control of behavior—particularly crime;

       I.      Foster civic pride and community spirit so as to improve the quality and quantity of citizen
              participation in local government and in community growth, change and improvements;

       J.       Sustain the comfort, health, tranquility and contentment of  residents and attract new
              residents by reason of the City's favorable environment and, thus, to promote and protect the
              peace, health and welfare of the City.

Section  4.420.  Review Authority for Site Design Review.

(.01)  Application of Section.

       A.     Unless exempt as noted in 1.—2. below, no building permit shall be issued for a new building
              or major exterior remodeling of an existing building unless the building architecture and
              siting is approved by the Development Review Board (Board) through Site Design Review.

              1.      Residential structures in residential zones are exempt from Site Design Review as long
                     as they meet established clear and objective design and siting standards or any allowed
                     adjustments. This exemption does not apply to mixed-use residential structures. How-
                     ever, an applicant may elect to have residential structures approved by the Board
                     through Site Design Review in association with waivers from specific standards.

              2.      Minor building modifications to non-residential structures are reviewed under the
                     authority of the Planning Director as established is Section 4.030.

Supp. No. 5                                                CD4:430
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.421

       B.      Unless exempt as noted in 1.—2. below, no building permit within an area covered by a Stage
              II Planned Development, or PDP in the Village Zone, shall be granted unless landscaping
              plans are reviewed and approved by the Board through Site Design review, or FDP in the
              Village Zone.
              1.      Landscaping on residential lots in residential zones is exempt from Site Design Review
                     unless it is part of the open space required under Subsection 4.113(.01).

              2.      Minor modifications to landscape plans subject to Site Design are reviewed under the
                     authority of the Planning Director as established is[in] Section 4.030.

       C.     No Sign Permit, except as permitted in Sections 4.156.02 and 4.156.05, shall be issued for the
              erection or construction of a sign relating to such new building or major remodeling, until the
              plans, drawings, sketches and other documents required for a Sign Permit application have
              been reviewed and approved by the Board.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 557, 9-5-2003; Ord. No. 704, 6-18-2012; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018;
Ord. No. 892, § 2(Exh. A), 12-2-2024)

Section  4.421.  Criteria and Application of Design Standards.

(.01)  The following standards shall be utilized by the Board in reviewing the plans, drawings, sketches
       and other documents required for Site Design Review. These standards are intended to provide a
       frame of reference for the applicant in the development of site and building plans as well as a
       method of review for the Board. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements.
       They are not intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation. The specifications of one
       or more particular architectural styles is not included in these standards. (Even in the Boones Ferry
       Overlay Zone, a range of architectural styles will be encouraged.)

       A.     Preservation of Landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
              practicable, by minimizing tree and soils removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping
              with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.

       B.      Relation of Proposed Buildings to Environment. Proposed structures shall be located and
              designed to assure harmony with the natural environment, including protection of steep
              slopes, vegetation and other naturally sensitive areas for wildlife habitat and shall provide
              proper buffering from less intensive uses in accordance with Sections 4.171 and 4.139 and
              4.139.5. The achievement of  such relationship may include the enclosure of  space in
              conjunction with other existing buildings or other proposed buildings and the creation of
              focal points with respect to avenues of approach, street access or relationships to natural
              features such as vegetation or topography.

       C.     Drives, Parking and Circulation. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, includ-
              ing walkways, interior drives and parking, special attention shall be given to location and
              number of access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular
              traffic, and arrangement of  parking areas that are safe and convenient and, insofar as
              practicable, do not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the
              neighboring properties.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:431
§ 4.421                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       D.     Surface Water Drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site surface drainage so
              that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties of the public
              storm drainage system.
       E.     Utility Service. Any utility installations above ground shall be located so as to have a
              harmonious relation to neighboring properties and site. The proposed method of sanitary
              and storm sewage disposal from all buildings shall be indicated.
       F.      Advertising Features. In addition to the requirements of  the City's sign regulations, the
              following criteria should be included: the size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and
              materials of all exterior signs and outdoor advertising structures or features shall not detract
              from the design of proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding properties.
       G.     Special Features. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations, surface areas,
              truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and struc-
              tures shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening methods as shall be
              required to prevent their being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment
              and its surrounding properties. Standards for screening and buffering are contained in
              Section 4.176.
(.02)  The standards of review outlined in Sections (a) through (g) above shall also apply to all accessory
       buildings, structures, exterior signs and other site features, however related to the major buildings
       or structures.

(.03)  The Board shall also be guided by the purpose of Section 4.400, and such objectives shall serve as
       additional criteria and standards.

(.04)  Conditional application. The Planning Director, Planning Commission, Development Review
       Board or City Council may, as a Condition of Approval for a zone change, subdivision, land
       partition, variance, conditional use, or other land use action, require conformance to the site
       development standards set forth in this Section.
(.05)  The Board may attach certain development or use conditions in granting an approval that are
       determined necessary to insure the proper and efficient functioning of the development, consistent
       with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan, allowed densities and the requirements of this Code. In
       making this determination of compliance and attaching conditions, the Board shall, however,
       consider the effects of this action on the availability and cost of needed housing. The provisions of
       this section shall not be used in such a manner that additional conditions either singularly or
       accumulatively have the effect of  unnecessarily increasing the cost of  housing or effectively
       excluding a needed housing type.

(.06)  The Board or Planning Director may require that certain paints or colors of materials be used in
       approving applications. Such requirements shall only be applied when site development or other
       land use applications are being reviewed by the City.
       A.     Where the conditions of approval for a development permit specify that certain paints or
              colors of materials be used, the use of those paints or colors shall be binding upon the
              applicant. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted until compliance with such condi-
              tions has been verified.

Supp. No. 5                                               CD4:432
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.430

       B.      Subsequent changes to the color of a structure shall not be subject to City review unless the
              conditions of  approval under which the original colors were set included a condition
              requiring a subsequent review before the colors could be changed.

Section  4.430.  Location, Design and Access Standards for Mixed Solid Waste and Recycling Areas.

(.01)  The following locations, design and access standards for mixed solid waste and recycling storage
       areas shall be applicable to the requirements of Section 4.179 of the Wilsonville City Code.

(.02)  Location Standards:

       A.     To encourage its use, the storage area for source separated recyclables shall be co-located with
              the storage area for residual mixed solid waste.

       B.      Indoor and outdoor storage areas shall comply with Uniform Building and Fire Code
              requirements.

       C.     Storage area space requirements can be satisfied with a single location or multiple locations
              and can combine with both interior and exterior locations.

       D.     Exterior storage areas can be located within interior side yard or rear yard areas. Minimum
              setback shall be three feet. Exterior storage areas shall not be located within a required front
              yard setback, including double frontage lots.

       E.     Exterior storage areas shall be located in central and visible locations on a site to enhance
              security for users.

       F.      Exterior storage areas can be located in a parking area Storage areas shall be appropriately
              screened according to the provisions of Section 4.430(.03), below.

       G.     The storage area shall be accessible for collection vehicles and located so that the storage area
              will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement on the site or on public streets
              adjacent to the site.

(.03)  Design Standards:

       A.     The dimensions of the storage area shall accommodate containers consistent with current
              methods of local collection.

       B.      Storage containers shall meet Uniform Fire Code standards and be made of or covered with
              waterproof materials or situated in a covered area.

       C.     Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by a sight obscuring fence, wall or hedge at least six
              feet in height. Gate openings for haulers shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and shall be
              capable of being secured in a closed or open position. In no case shall exterior storage areas
              be located in conflict with the vision clearance requirements of Section 4.177.

       D.     Storage area(s) and containers shall be clearly labeled to indicate the type of  materials
              accepted.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:433
§ 4.430                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.04)  Access Standards:

       A.     Access to storage areas can be limited for security reasons. However, the storage area shall be
              accessible to users at convenient times of the day and to collect service personnel on the day
              and approximate time they are scheduled to provide collection service.

       B.      Storage areas shall be designed to be easily accessible to collection trucks and equipment,
              considering paving, grade and vehicle access. A minimum of ten feet horizontal clearance
              and eight feet of vertical clearance is required if the storage area is covered.

       C.     Storage areas shall be accessible to collection vehicles without requiring backing out of a
              driveway onto a public street. If only a single access point is available to the storage area,
              adequate turning radius shall be provided to allow collection vehicles to safely exit the site in
              a forward motion.
(Ord. No. 426, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.440.  Procedure.

(.01)  Submission of Documents. A prospective applicant for a building or other permit who is subject to
       site design review shall submit to the Planning Department, in addition to the requirements of
       Section 4.035, the following:

       A.     A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of  all structures and other
              improvements including, where appropriate, driveways, pedestrian walks, landscaped areas,
              fences, walls, off-street parking and loading areas, and railroad tracks. The site plan shall
              indicate the location of entrances and exits and direction of traffic flow into and out of
              off-street parking and loading areas, the location of each parking space and each loading
              berth and areas of turning and maneuvering vehicles. The site plan shall indicate how utility
              service and drainage are to be provided.

       B.      A Landscape Plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and design of landscaped areas, the
              variety and sizes of trees and plant materials to be planted on the site, the location and design
              of landscaped areas, the varieties, by scientific and common name, and sizes of trees and
              plant materials to be retained or planted on the site, other pertinent landscape features, and
              irrigation systems required to maintain trees and plant materials. An inventory, drawn at the
              same scale as the Site Plan, of existing trees of four inch caliper or more is required. However,
              when large areas of trees are proposed to be retained undisturbed, only a survey identifying
              the location and size of all perimeter trees in the mass in necessary.

       C.     Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, including floor plans, in sufficient detail
              to permit computation of yard requirements and showing all elevations of the proposed
              structures and other improvements as they will appear on completion of construction. Floor
              plans shall also be provided in sufficient detail to permit computation of yard requirements
              based on the relationship of indoor versus outdoor living area, and to evaluate the floor
              plan's effect on the exterior design of the building through the placement and configuration
              of windows and doors.

Supp. No. 6                                                CD4:434
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.440

       D.     A Color Board displaying specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior surfaces of
              proposed structures. Also, a phased development schedule if the development is constructed
              in stages.
       E.     A sign Plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size, design, material, color and methods
              of illumination of all exterior signs.
       F.      The required application fee.

(.02)  As soon as possible after the preparation of a staff report, a public hearing shall be scheduled
       before the Development Review Board. In accordance with the procedures set forth in Section

Supp. No. 6                                             CD4:434.1

                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.450

      4.010(2) and 4.012, the Development Review Board shall review and approve, approve with
      conditions,ordenytheproposedarchitectural,sitedevelopment,landscapingorsignplansof the
      applicant.If theBoardfindsthatadditionalinformationortimearenecessarytorenderadecision,
      the matter may be continued to a date certain. The applicant shall be immediately notified in
      writing of any such continuation or delay together with the scheduled date of review.

Section  4.441. Effective Date of Decisions.

Adecisionof theBoardshallbecomeeffective14calendardaysafterthedateof thedecision,unlessthe
decisionisappealedto,orcalledupby,theCouncil.If thedecisionof theBoardisappealedto,orcalled
up by, the City Council, the decision of the Council shall become effective immediately.

Section  4.442. Time Limit on Approval.

Site design review approval shall be void after two years unless a building permit has been issued and
substantial development pursuant thereto has taken place; or an extension is granted by motion of the
Board. Section 4.443. Preliminary Consideration.

An applicant may request preliminary consideration by the Board of general plans prior to seeking a
buildingpermit.Whenseekingpreliminaryconsideration,theapplicantshallsubmitasiteplanshowing
the proposed structures, improvements and parking, together with a general description of the plans.
The Board shall approve or reject all or part of the applicant's general plan within the normal time
requirementsof aformalapplication.Preliminaryapprovalshallbedeemedtobeapprovalof thefinal
plan to the extent that the final design contains the characteristics of the preliminary design.

Section  4.450. Installation of Landscaping.

(.01)  All landscaping required by this section and approved by the Board shall be installed prior to
      issuanceof occupancypermits,unlesssecurityequalto110percentof thecostof thelandscaping
      asdeterminedbythePlanningDirectorisfiledwiththeCityassuringsuchinstallationwithinsix
      monthsof occupancy."Security"iscash,certifiedcheck,timecertificatesof deposit,assignmentof
      asavingsaccountorsuchotherassuranceof completionasshallmeetwiththeapprovalof theCity
      Attorney.Insuchcasesthedevelopershallalsoprovidewrittenauthorization,tothesatisfactionof
      theCityAttorney,fortheCityoritsdesigneestoenterthepropertyandcompletethelandscaping
      asapproved.If theinstallationof thelandscapingisnotcompletedwithinthesix-monthperiod,or
      within an extension of time authorized by the Board, the security may be used by the City to
      complete the installation. Upon completion of the installation, any portion of the remaining
      security deposited with the City shall be returned to the applicant.

(.02)  Action by the City approving a proposed landscape plan shall be binding upon the applicant.
      Substitutionof plantmaterials,irrigationsystems,orotheraspectsof anapprovedlandscapeplan
      shallnotbemadewithoutofficialactionof thePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoard,
      as specified in this Code.

(.03)  Alllandscapingshallbecontinuallymaintained,includingnecessarywatering,weeding,pruning,
      andreplacing,inasubstantiallysimilarmannerasoriginallyapprovedbytheBoard,unlessaltered
      with Board approval.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:435
§ 4.450                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.04)  If apropertyownerwishestoaddlandscapingforanexistingdevelopment,inanefforttobeautify
      the property, the Landscape Standards set forth in Section 4.176 shall not apply and no Plan
      approvalorpermitshallberequired.If theownerwishestomodifyorremovelandscapingthathas
      been accepted or approved through the City's development review process, that removal or
      modification must first be approved through the procedures of Section 4.010.

                                     WILLAMETTE RIVER GREENWAY

Section  4.500. General Purpose.

Thegeneralpurposesof thisSectionaretoprotect,conserve,enhanceandmaintainthenatural,scenic,
historical, agricultural, economic and recreational qualities of lands along the Willamette River as the
Willamette River Greenway.

Section  4.504. General—Greenway Boundaries.

TheWillametteRiverGreenwayBoundariesintheCityshallbethesameastheOregonStateParksand
Recreation Department Willamette River Greenway Boundaries, and shall be defined on the City of
Wilsonville Zoning and Comprehensive Plan Maps. The boundary is generally 150 feet from the
ordinarylowwaterlineunlessotherwisedefinedbytheMapandthisSection.GiventhattheGreenway
Boundary does not always parallel the banks of the River, contact should be made with the City's
Planning Department to verify boundary locations.

Section  4.506. General—Uses Permitted Outright.

(.01)  The following are outright permitted uses within the Willamette River Greenway Boundary:

      A.     The placing, by a public agency, of signs, markers, aids, etc. to serve the public.

      B.      Activities to protect, conserve, enhance and maintain public recreational, scenic, historical,
             andnaturalusesonpublicandprivatelands,exceptthatchangesof use,intensificationof use
             or development shall require Conditional Use Permit review as provided by this Code.

      C.     Agriculture as defined in ORS 215.203(2).

      D.     Reasonable emergency procedures necessary for the safety or protection of property.

      E.     Maintenance and repair usual and necessary for the continuance of an existing use not
             defined as intensification of use or change of use.

      F.      Uses legally existing on December 6, 1975.

Section  4.508. Conditional Use Permit—Uses Permitted Conditionally.

(.01)  ThefollowingusesmaybeallowedwithintheWillametteRiverGreenwayBoundariessubjectto
      a Conditional Use Permit by the Development Review Board:

      A.     All uses permitted in the underlying zone which are not listed as permitted uses in Section
             4.506.

Supp. No. 1                                            CD4:436
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                  § 4.514

      B.      All uses which are classified as intensification of use, change of use or development, other
             than tree removal, which shall be governed by the provisions of Section 4.600.

Section  4.510. Conditional Use Permit—Findings In Support of Granting.

(.01)  A Greenway Conditional Use Permit may be granted by the Development Review Board upon
      making the findings required in Section 4.184 (Conditional Use Permits) and the following
      additional findings:

      A.     That to the greatest extent possible, the maximum possible landscape area, open space or
             vegetation between the activity and the river are provided,

      B.      Thattothegreatestextentpossible,necessarypublicaccessinaccordancewiththeCompre-
             hensive Plan will be provided to and along the River by appropriate legal means.

      C.     That the change of use, intensification of use, or development complies with this Code, all
             otherapplicableCityOrdinances,theComprehensivePlan,andtheOregonStateParksand
             Recreation Department Greenway Plan.

Section  4.512. Conditional Use Permit—Application Procedures.

(.01)  AllConditionalUsePermitsshallbeappliedforandreviewedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoard
      in accordance with Section 4.184.

(.02)  Withinfivedaysof receiptof acompleteapplicationbytheCity,acopyof theapplicationshallbe
      forwardedtotheOregonStateParksandRecreationDepartmentbyCertifiedMail,withareturn
      receiptrequested.Noticeof theactiontakenbytheCityontheapplicationshallalsobesubmitted
      to the Oregon State Parks and Recreation Department within five days of the action.

Section  4.514. Conditional Use Permit—Use Management Standards.

(.01)  The natural scenic views, historical character and recreational qualities of the Willamette River
      shallbeprotectedbypreservationandenhancementof thevegetativefringealongtheriverbank.

(.02)  AplantoremoveanytreeortreesshallbereviewedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardunderthe
      procedures of Section 4.600, et seq. Based on the standards and procedures of Section 4.620.10,
      mandatorymitigationshallberequiredasaconditionof approvalforanyconditionalusepermit
      granted under this Section.

(.03)  Developments shall be directed away from the river to the greatest possible degree; provided,
      however, lands committed to urban uses within the Greenway shall be permitted to continue as
      urbanuses,includingport,industrial,commercialandresidentialuses,usespertainingtonaviga-
      tional requirements, water and land access needs and related facilities.

(.04)  All development after the effective date of this ordinance, except water dependent and water
      related uses, shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet upland from the top of each bank.

(.05)  Fish, riparian and wildlife corridors leading into the river channel shall remain open.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:437
§ 4.514                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

(.06)  Alldevelopment,changeof useorintensificationof useshalldemonstrate,tothemaximumextent
      possible, maintenance of public safety and protection of public and private property, especially
      from vandalism and trespass.
(Ord. No. 210, 5-3-1982; Ord. No. 516, 5-7-2001)

                                 TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION

Section  4.600. Purpose and Declaration.

(.01)  Rapid growth, the spread of development, need for water and increasing demands upon natural
      resourceshavetheeffectof encroachingupon,despoiling,oreliminatingmanyof thetrees,other
      formsof vegetation,andnaturalresourcesandprocessesassociatedtherewithwhich,if preserved
      andmaintainedinanundisturbedandnaturalcondition,constituteimportantphysical,aesthetic,
      recreational and economic assets to existing and future residents of the City of Wilsonville.

(.02)  Specifically, the City Council finds that:

      A.     Woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of  air pollutants and
             contamination, through the reduction of excessive noise and mental and physical damage
             related to noise pollution, and through its cooling effect in the summer months, and
             insulating effects in winter;

      B.      Woodlands provide for public safety through the prevention of  erosion, siltation, and
             flooding; and

      C.     Trees make a positive contribution to water quality and water supply by absorbing rainfall,
             controlling surface water run-off, and filtering and assisting in ground water recharge; and

      D.     Treesandwoodlandgrowthareanessentialcomponentof thegeneralwelfareof theCityof
             Wilsonville by producing play areas for children and natural beauty, recreation for all ages
             and an irreplaceable heritage for existing and future City residents.

(.03)  Therefore, the purposes of this subchapter are:

      A.     TopreserveSignificantResourceOverlayZoneareas,recognizingthatdevelopmentcanand
             will occur.

      B.      To provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance and use of  trees and
             woodlands in order to protect natural habitat and prevent erosion.

      C.     To protect trees and other wooded areas for their economic contribution to local property
             valueswhenpreserved,andfortheirnaturalbeautyandecologicalorhistoricalsignificance.

      D.     To protect water quality, control surface water run-off, and protect ground water recharge.

      E.     Toreflectthepublicconcernforthesenaturalresourcesintheinterestof health,safetyand
             general welfare of Wilsonville residents.

      F.      To encourage replanting where trees are removed.

Supp. No. 1                                             CD4:438
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                            § 4.600.40

Section  4.600.20. Applicability of Subchapter.

(.01)  Theprovisionsof thissubchapterapplytotheUnitedStatesandtheStateof Oregon,andtotheir
      agencies and subdivisions, including the City of Wilsonville, and to the employees and agents
      thereof.

(.02)  Bythissubchapter,theCityof Wilsonvilleregulatesforestpracticesonalllandslocatedwithinits
      urban growth boundary, as provided by ORS 527.722.

(.03)  The provisions of this subchapter apply to all land within the City limits, including property
      designatedasaSignificantResourceOverlayZoneorotherareasortreesdesignatedasprotected
      bytheComprehensivePlan,Cityzoningmap,oranyotherlaworordinance;exceptthatanytree
      activities in the Willamette River Greenway that are regulated by the provisions of WC 4.500 -
      4.514andrequiringaconditionalusepermitshallbereviewedbytheDRBundertheapplication
      and review procedures set forth for Tree Removal Permits.

Section  4.600.30. Tree Removal Permit Required.

(.01)  RequirementEstablished.NopersonshallremoveanytreewithoutfirstobtainingaTreeRemoval
      Permit (TRP) as required by this subchapter.

(.02)  TreeRemovalPermitswillbereviewedaccordingtothestandardsprovidedforinthissubchapter,
      in addition to all other applicable requirements of Chapter 4.

(.03)  AlthoughtreeactivitiesintheWillametteRiverGreenwayaregovernedbyWC4.500—4.514,the
      applicationmaterialsrequiredtoapplyforaconditionaluseshallbethesameasthoserequiredfor
      a Type B or C permit under this subchapter, along with any additional materials that may be
      requiredbythePlanningDepartment.AnapplicationforaTreeRemovalPermitunderthissection
      shall be reviewed by the Development Review Board.

Section  4.600.40. Exceptions.

(.01)  Exceptionfromrequirement. Notwithstanding the requirement of WC 4.600.30(1), the following
      activities are allowed without a Tree Removal Permit, unless otherwise prohibited:
      A.    Agriculture, Commercial Tree Farm or Orchard. Tree removal or transplanting occurring
            duringuseof landforcommercialpurposesforagriculture,orchard(s),ortreefarm(s),such
            as Christmas tree production.
      B.    Emergencies.Actionsmadenecessarybyanemergency,suchastornado,windstorm,flood,
            freeze,utilitydamageorotherlikedisasters,inordertopreventimminentinjuryordamage
            topersonsorpropertyorrestoreorderanditisimpracticalduetocircumstancestoapplyfor
            a permit.
            1.      Whenanemergencyhasoccurred,aTreeRemovalPermitmustbeappliedforwithin30
                   days following the emergency tree removal under the application procedures estab-
                   lished in this subchapter.
            2.      Inadditiontocomplyingwiththepermitapplicationrequirementsof thissubchapter,
                   anapplicantshallprovideaphotographof anytreeremovedandabrief descriptionof

Supp. No. 1                                         CD4:439
§ 4.600.40                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

                    theconditionsthatnecessitatedemergencyremoval.Suchphotographshallbesupplied
                    withinsevendaysof applicationforapermit.Basedongoodcauseshownarisingout
                    of the emergency, the Planning Director may waive any or all requirements of this
                    section.

             3.      Where a Type A Permit is granted for emergency tree removal, the permitee is
                    encouraged to apply to the City Tree Fund for replanting assistance.

      C.     City utility or road work in utility or road easements, in utility or road rights-of-way, or in
             public lands. However, any trees removed in the course of utility work shall be mitigated in
             accordance with the standards of this subchapter.

      D.    Nuisance abatement. The City is not required to apply for a Tree Removal Permit to
             undertake nuisance abatement as provided in WC 6.200 et seq. However, the owner of the
             property subject to nuisance abatement is subject to all the provisions of this subchapter in
             addition to the requirements of WC 6.200 et seq.

      E.     The removal of filbert trees is exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.

      F.      TheCharbonneauDistrict,includingitsgolf course,isexemptfromtherequirementsof WC
             4.600.30(1) on the basis that by and through the current CC&R's of  the Charbonneau
             Country  Club,  the  homeowners'  association  complies  with  all  requirements  of  WC
             4.610.30(1)(C)(1).ThisexceptionhasbeenbasedupontheTreeMaintenanceandProtection
             Plan that has been submitted by the Charbonneau Country Club and approved by the
             Planning Director. Tree removal activities remain subject to all applicable standards of this
             subchapter.UnlessauthorizedbytheCity,thisexceptiondoesnotincludetreeremovalupon
             anypubliceasementsorpublicpropertywithinthedistrict.IntheeventthattheCC&R'sare
             changedrelativetotheeffectof theTreeMaintenanceandProtectionPlan,thenthePlanning
             Directorshallreviewwhethersucheffectismaterial,whetheritcanbemitigated,andif not,
             may disallow the exemption.

Section  4.600.50. Application for Tree Removal Permit.

(.01)  ApplicationforPermit. A person seeking to remove one or more trees shall apply to the Director
      foraTreeRemovalPermitforaTypeA,B,C,orDpermit,dependingontheapplicablestandards
      as provided in this subchapter.

      A.     Anapplicationforatreeremovalpermitthatdoesnotmeettherequirementsof TypeAmay
             be submitted as a Type B application.

(.02)  Time of Application. Application for a Tree Removal Permit shall be made before removing or
      transplantingtrees,exceptinemergencysituationsasprovidedinWC4.600.40(1)(B)above.Where
      the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan or plat review, application for a Tree
      Removal Permit shall be made as part of the site development application as specified in this
      subchapter.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:440
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                              § 4.610.00

(.03)  Fees.ApersonapplyingforaTreeRemovalPermitshallpayanon-refundableapplicationfee;as
      established by resolution of the City Council.
      A.     By submission of an application, the applicant shall be deemed to have authorized City
             representatives to have access to applicant's property as may be needed to verify the
             information provided, to observe site conditions, and if a permit is granted, to verify that
             terms and conditions of the permit are followed.

Section  4.610.00. Application Review Procedure.

(.01)  Thepermitapplicantshallprovidecompleteinformationasrequiredbythissubchapterinorder
      for the City to review the application.

(.02)  DepartmentalReview.AllapplicationsforTreeRemovalPermitsmustbedeemedcompletebythe
      City Planning Department before being accepted for review. When all required information has
      been supplied, the Planning Department will verify whether the application is complete. Upon
      request of either the applicant or the City, the City may conduct a field inspection or review
      meeting.Citydepartmentsinvolvedinthereviewshallsubmittheirreportandrecommendations
      to the Planning Director who shall forward them to the appropriate reviewing authority.

(.03)  ReviewingAuthority.
      A.    TypeAorB.WheresiteplanrevieworplatapprovalbytheDevelopmentReviewBoardisnot
             requiredbyCityordinance,thegrantordenialof theTreeRemovalPermitapplicationshall
             be the responsibility of the Planning Director. The Planning Director has the authority to
             refer a Type B permit application to the DRB under the Class II administrative review
             proceduresof thisChapter.Thedecisiontograntordenyapermitshallbegovernedbythe
             applicable review standards enumerated in WC 4.610.10.

      B.    Type C. Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan review or plat
             approval by the Development Review Board, the Development Review Board shall be
             responsible for granting or denying the application for a Tree Removal Permit, and that
             decision may be subject to affirmance, reversal or modification by the City Council, if
             subsequentlyreviewedbytheCouncil.ForsitedevelopmentapplicationssubjecttoaClassII
             administrative review process in the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District, the
             PlanningDirectorshallberesponsibleforthegrantingordenialof theTreeRemovalPermit
             application.
      C.    TypeD.TypeDpermitapplicationsshallbesubjecttothestandardsandproceduresof Class
             IadministrativereviewandshallbereviewedforcompliancewiththeOregonForestPractice
             Rules and Statutes. The Planning Director shall make the decision to grant or deny an
             application for a Type D permit.

      D.    Reviewperiodforcompleteapplications.TypeApermitapplicationsshallbereviewedwithin
             ten working days. Type B permit applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Director
             within30calendardays,exceptthattheDRBshallreviewanyreferredapplicationwithin60
             calendardays.TypeCpermitapplicationsshallbereviewedwithinthetimeframeestablished
             by this Chapter. Type D permit applications shall be reviewed within 15 calendar days.

Supp. No. 1                                          CD4:441
§ 4.610.00                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

(.04)  Notice. Before the granting of a Type C Tree Removal Permit, notice of the application shall be
      sent by regular mail to all owners within 250 feet of the property where the trees are located as
      provided for in WC 4.010. The notice shall indicate where the application may be inspected and
      when a public hearing on the application will be held.

(.05)  DenialofTreeRemovalPermit.WheneveranapplicationforaTreeRemovalPermitisdenied,the
      permit applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the reasons for denial.

(.06)  Grant of a Tree Removal Permit. Whenever an application for a Type B, C or D Tree Removal
      Permit is granted, the reviewing authority shall:

      A.    Conditions. Attach to the granting of  the permit any reasonable conditions considered
             necessarybythereviewingauthorityincluding,butnotlimitedto,therecordingof anyplan
             oragreementapprovedunderthissubchapter,toensurethattheintentof thisChapterwillbe
             fulfilledandtominimizedamageto,encroachmentonorinterferencewithnaturalresources
             and processes within wooded areas;

      B.    Completionof Operations. Fix a reasonable time to complete tree removal operations; and

      C.    Security. Require the Type C permit grantee to file with the City a cash or corporate surety
             bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount determined necessary by the City to
             ensure compliance with Tree Removal Permit conditions and this Chapter.

             1.      ThisrequirementmaybewaivedbythePlanningDirectorif thetreeremovalmustbe
                    completedbeforeaplatisrecorded,andtheapplicanthascompliedwithWC4.264(1)
                    of this Code.
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.610.10. Standards for Tree Removal, Relocation or Replacement.

(.01)  Except where an application is exempt, or where otherwise noted, the following standards shall
      govern the review of an application for a Type A, B, C or D Tree Removal Permit:

      A.    Standard for the Significant Resource Overlay Zone. The standard for tree removal in the
             Significant Resource Overlay Zone shall be that removal or transplanting of any tree is not
             inconsistent with the purposes of this Chapter.

      B.    PreservationandConservation. No development application shall be denied solely because
             treesgrowonthesite.Nevertheless,treepreservationandconservationasadesignprinciple
             shall be equal in concern and importance to other design principles.

      C.    DevelopmentalAlternatives. Preservation and conservation of wooded areas and trees shall
             be given careful consideration when there are feasible and reasonable location alternatives
             and design options on-site for proposed buildings, structures or other site improvements.

      D.    Land Clearing. Where the proposed activity requires land clearing, the clearing shall be
             limitedtodesignatedstreetrights-of-wayandareasnecessaryfortheconstructionof build-
             ings, structures or other site improvements.

Supp. No. 1                                             CD4:442
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.610.10

      E.    Residential Development. Where the proposed activity involves residential development,
             residentialunitsshall,totheextentreasonablyfeasible,bedesignedandconstructedtoblend
             into the natural setting of the landscape.

      F.     Compliance With Statutes and Ordinances. The proposed activity shall comply with all
             applicable statutes and ordinances.

      G.    RelocationorReplacement.Theproposedactivityshallincludenecessaryprovisionsfortree
             relocationorreplacement,inaccordancewithWC4.620.00,andtheprotectionof thosetrees
             that are not to be removed, in accordance with WC 4.620.10.

      H.    Limitation. Tree removal or transplanting shall be limited to instances where the applicant
             hasprovidedcompletedinformationasrequiredbythisChapterandthereviewingauthority
             determinesthatremovalortransplantingisnecessarybasedonthecriteriaof thissubsection.

             1.     NecessaryForConstruction. Where the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the
                    reviewingauthoritythatremovalortransplantingisnecessaryfortheconstructionof a
                    building,structureorothersiteimprovement,andthatthereisnofeasibleandreason-
                    ablelocationalternativeordesignoptionon-siteforaproposedbuilding,structureor
                    othersiteimprovement;oratreeislocatedtooclosetoexistingorproposedbuildings
                    or structures, or creates unsafe vision clearance.

             2.     Disease,Damage,orNuisance,orHazard. Where the tree is diseased, damaged, or in
                    danger of falling, or presents a hazard as defined in WC 6.208, or is a nuisance as
                    definedinWC6.200etseq.,orcreatesunsafevisionclearanceasdefinedinthisCode.
                    (a)    Asaconditionof approvalof StageIIdevelopment,filberttreesmustberemoved
                          if they are no longer commercially grown or maintained.

             3.     Interference. Where the tree interferes with the healthy growth of other trees, existing
                    utilityserviceordrainage,orutilityworkinapreviouslydedicatedright-of-way,andit
                    is not feasible to preserve the tree on site.

             4.     Other. Where the applicant shows that tree removal or transplanting is reasonable
                    under the circumstances.

      I.      Additional Standards for Type C Permits.

             1.     Tree survey. For all site development applications reviewed under the provisions of
                    Chapter 4 Planning and Zoning, the developer shall provide a Tree Survey before site
                    development as required by WC 4.610.40, and provide a Tree Maintenance and
                    Protection plan, unless specifically exempted by the Planning Director or DRB, prior
                    to initiating site development.

             2.     PlattedSubdivisions. The recording of a final subdivision plat whose preliminary plat
                    has been reviewed and approved after the effective date of Ordinance 464 by the City
                    and that conforms with this subchapter shall include a Tree Survey and Maintenance
                    andProtectionPlan,asrequiredbythissubchapter,alongwithallotherconditionsof
                    approval.

Supp. No. 1                                          CD4:442.1
§ 4.610.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

             3.     Utilities. The City Engineer shall cause utilities to be located and placed wherever
                    reasonably possible to avoid adverse environmental consequences given the circum-
                    stances of existing locations, costs of placement and extensions, the public welfare,
                    terrain, and preservation of natural resources. Mitigation and/or replacement of any
                    removed trees shall be in accordance with the standards of this subchapter.

      J.     Exemption.TypeDpermitapplicationsshallbeexemptfromreviewunderstandardsD,E,H
             and I of this subsection.

Section  4.610.20. Type A Permit.

(.01)  Approvaltoremoveonetothreetreeswithina12monthperiodonanypropertyshallbegranted
      if the application meets all of the following requirements:

      A.     The trees subject to removal are not located in the Significant Resource Overlay Zone; and

      B.      The trees subject to removal are not located in the Willamette River Greenway;

      C.     The trees subject to removal are not Heritage Trees.
      D.     The trees subject to removal are not street trees;

      E.     The trees subject to removal must not be retained as a condition of  site development
             approval.

(.02)  WheretheCitydeterminesthatanapplicationtoremoveatreeortreesdoesnotmeetthecriteria
      of 1(A)—(E) of this section, then the application may be submitted as a Type B application.

(.03)  An application for a Type A Permit shall contain the following information:
      A.     A brief statement explaining why tree removal is necessary.

      B.      Abrief descriptionof thetreesproposedforremovalorrelocation,includingcommonname,
             approximateheight,diameter(orcircumference)atfourandone-half feetd.b.h.abovegrade,
             and apparent health.

      C.     Adrawingthatdepictswheretreesarelocatedandprovidessufficientdetailtoindicatetoa
             City reviewer where removal or relocation will occur.

      D.     The name of the person who will perform the removal or transplanting, if known, and the
             approximate date of removal.

      E.     Additional supporting information which the Planning Department requests, in order to
             determine whether an application meets the requirements of this section.

(.04)  The City shall accept a Type A permit application under the following procedure:

      A.     ReviewPeriod.CompletedTypeApermitapplicationsshallbereviewedwithintenworking
             days.Thegrantordenialof theTreeRemovalPermitapplicationshallbetheresponsibility
             of the Planning Director.

      B.      TheTypeApermitapplicationshallbereviewedunderthestandardsof ClassIadministra-
             tive review and applicable requirements of this subchapter.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:442.2
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.610.30

Section  4.610.30. Type B Permit.

(.01)  An applicant may apply for a Type B Permit based on the following criteria:
      A.     The applicant proposes to remove four or more trees on property not subject to site
             development review; or
      B.      The applicant proposes major or minor changes in a condition or conditions of a develop-
             ment permit previously approved under the provisions of this Chapter; or
      C.     The applicant is a homeowners' association that proposes to remove trees on property
             previously approved by the City for development.
             1.      A Tree Maintenance and Protection Plan submitted for approval under (1)(C) of this
                    subsection shall meet the following criteria:
                    a.      The Development Review Board shall review the Covenants, Conditions and
                          Restrictions (CC&R's) to verify that the homeowners' association is designated
                          andauthorizedbytheCC&R'storeviewtreemaintenance,removal,andplanting
                          requests.
                    b.      Arequestfortreeremovalshallindicatethereasonfortherequest,aswellasthe
                          location, size, species and health of tree.
                    c.      Decisions on requests and actions taken are documented and retained and shall
                          be made available to the City's Development Review Board upon request.
                    d.      Areplantingprogramisestablishedandreviewedonanannualbasis.Wheresuch
                          a program is approved, mitigation under this Chapter shall not be required.

Supp. No. 1                                           CD4:442.3

                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.610.30

             2.      Anypermitapprovedunderthissubsectionshallrequirethatallmaintenance,planting,
                   and removal be performed to the standards established in this subchapter and in
                   Wilsonville Code.

             3.      Failureof ahomeowners'associationtomeettherequirementsof thissubsectionshall
                   be grounds for revocation of a Type B permit.

(.02)  ApplicationfortheTypeBpermitshallconsistof theinformationrequiredforaTypeAPermit,
      asprovidedinWC4.610.20,andaTreeMaintenanceandProtectionPlan,whichshallcontainthe
      following information:

      A.     Anaccuratetopographicalsurvey,subdivisionmaporplatmap,thatbearsthesignatureof a
             qualified, registered surveyor or engineer, and which shows:

             1.      the shape and dimensions of  the property, and the location of  any existing and
                   proposed structure or improvement,

             2.      the location of the trees on the site, and indicating species, approximate height, d.b.h.
                   diameter, canopy spread and common name,

             3.      the location of  existing and proposed easements, as well as setbacks required by
                   existing zoning requirements.

      B.      Inlieuof themaporsurvey,anapplicantproposingtoremovetreesunder(1)(B)or(1)(C)of
             thissubsectionmayprovideaerialphotographswithoverlays,GISdocumentation,ormaps
             approvedbythePlanningDirector,andclearlyindicatingtheinformationrequiredby(2)(A)
             of this subsection.

      C.     Arborist Report. The report shall describe the health and condition of all trees subject to
             removalortransplanting,andshallincludeinformationonspecies,commonname,diameter
             at four and one-half feet d.b.h., approximately height and age.

      D.    TreeProtection.UnlessspecificallyexemptedbythePlanningDirector,astatementdescrib-
             ing how trees intended to remain will be protected during tree removal, and how remaining
             trees will be maintained.

      E.    TreeIdentification. Unless specifically exempted by the Planning Director, a statement that
             anytreesproposedforremovalwillbeidentifiedbyamethodobvioustoasiteinspector,such
             as tagging, painting, or flagging, in addition to clear identification on construction docu-
             ments.

      F.     ReplacementTrees.Adescriptionof theproposedtreereplacementprogramwithadetailed
             explanation including the number, size, and species, and cost. In lieu of replacing trees, the
             applicantmayproposetopayintotheCityTreeFundanamountequivalenttothevalueof
             the replacement trees after installation, as provided in this subchapter.

      G.    Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&R's).  Where the applicant is proposing to
             removetreesoncommonareas,theapplicantshallprovideacopyof theapplicableCC&R's,
             including any landscaping provisions.

                                                      CD4:443
§ 4.610.30                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      H.    Waiverofdocumentation.ThePlanningDirectormaywaiveanapplicationdocumentwhere
             therequiredinformationhasalreadybeenmadeavailabletotheCity,orwheretheDirector
             determines the information is not necessary to review the application.
(.03)  Review:
      A.     The Type B permit application, including major or minor changes in a condition or
             conditions of  a development permit previously approved under the provisions of  this
             chapter, shall be reviewed under the standards of Class II administrative review and the
             requirementsof thissubchapter.WheresiteplanrevieworplatapprovalbytheDevelopment
             ReviewBoardisnotrequiredbyCityordinance,thegrantordenialof theTypeBpermitshall
             be the responsibility of the Planning Director. The Planning Director has the authority to
             refer a Type B permit application to DRB under the Class II administrative review proce-
             dures of this Chapter.
      B.      The DRB shall review and render a decision on any application referred by the Planning
             Directorwithin60days.ThePlanningDirectorshallreviewacompletedpermitapplication
             within 30 days.
      C.     ThedecisiontograntordenyaTypeBpermitshallbegovernedbythestandardsestablished
             in WC 4.610.10.

Section  4.610.40. Type C Permit.
(.01)  Approval to remove any trees on property as part of a site development application may be
      grantedinaTypeCpermit.ATypeCpermitapplicationshallbereviewedbythestandardsof this
      subchapter and all applicable review criteria of Chapter 4. Application of the standards of this
      section shall not result in a reduction of square footage or loss of density, but may require an
      applicant to modify plans to allow for buildings of greater height. If an applicant proposes to
      remove trees and submits a landscaping plan as part of  a site development application, an
      applicationforaTreeRemovalPermitshallbeincluded.TheTreeRemovalPermitapplicationwill
      bereviewedintheStageIIdevelopmentreviewprocess.TheDRBshallreviewallTypeCpermits,
      with the exception of Class II development review applications located within the Coffee Creek
      Industrial Design Overlay District, where the Planning Director shall have review authority. Any
      plan changes made that affect trees after Stage II review of a development application shall be
      subjecttoreviewbytheoriginalapprovalauthority.Wheremitigationisrequiredfortreeremoval,
      such mitigation may be considered as part of the landscaping requirements as set forth in this
      Chapter.Treeremovalshallnotcommenceuntilapprovalof therequiredStageIIapplicationand
      theexpirationof theappealperiodfollowingthatdecision.If adecisionapprovingaTypeCpermit
      is appealed, no trees shall be removed until the appeal has been settled.

(.02)  Theapplicantmustprovidetencopiesof aTreeMaintenanceandProtectionPlancompletedby
      an arborist that contains the following information:
      A.     A plan, including a topographical survey bearing the stamp and signature of a qualified,
             registered professional containing all the following information:
             1.     PropertyDimensions. The shape and dimensions of the property, and the location of
                   any existing and proposed structure or improvement.

                                                      CD4:444
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                               § 4.610.50

             2.     Treesurvey. The survey must include:
                   a.      An accurate drawing of  the site based on accurate survey techniques at a
                          minimumscaleof oneinchequals100feetandwhichprovidesa)thelocationof
                          alltreeshavingsixinchesorgreaterd.b.h.likelytobeimpacted,b)thespreadof
                          canopyof thosetrees,(c)thecommonandbotanicalnameof thosetrees,andd)
                          the approximate location and name of any other trees on the property.
                   b.      Adescriptionof thehealthandconditionof alltreeslikelytobeimpactedonthe
                          siteproperty.Inaddition,fortreesinapresentorproposedpublicstreetorroad
                          right-of-waythataredescribedasunhealthy,thedescriptionshallincluderecom-
                          mendedactionstorestoresuchtreestofullhealth.Treesproposedtoremain,to
                          betransplantedortoberemovedshallbesodesignated.Alltreestoremainonthe
                          sitearetobedesignatedwithmetaltagsthataretoremaininplacethroughoutthe
                          development. Those tags shall be numbered, with the numbers keyed to the tree
                          survey map that is provided with the application.
                   c.      Where a stand of 20 or more contiguous trees exist on a site and the applicant
                          does not propose to remove any of those trees, the required tree survey may be
                          simplified to accurately show only the perimeter area of that stand of trees,
                          including its drip line. Only those trees on the perimeter of the stand shall be
                          tagged, as provided in "b," above.
                   d.      All Oregon white oaks, native yews, and any species listed by either the state or
                          federal government as rare or endangered shall be shown in the tree survey.
             3.     TreeProtection.Astatementdescribinghowtreesintendedtoremainwillbeprotected
                   during development, and where protective barriers are necessary, that they will be
                   erectedbeforeworkstarts.Barriersshallbesufficientlysubstantialtowithstandnearby
                   construction activities. Plastic tape or similar forms of  markers do not constitute
                   "barriers."
             4.     EasementsandSetbacks.Locationanddimensionof existingandproposedeasements,
                   as well as all setbacks required by existing zoning requirements.
             5.     Grade Changes. Designation of grade changes proposed for the property that may
                   impact trees.
             6.     Costof Replacement.Acostestimatefortheproposedtreereplacementprogramwith
                   a detailed explanation including the number, size and species.
             7.     Tree Identification. A statement that all trees being retained will be identified by
                   numbered metal tags, as specified in subsection "A," above in addition to clear identi-
                   fication on construction documents.
(Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

Section  4.610.50. Type D Permit.

(.01)  The owner or operator of a commercial woodlot shall apply and receive approval for a Type D
      Permit before beginning harvesting operations of more than three trees within any 12 month

                                                      CD4:445
§ 4.610.50                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

      period. Type D permit applications shall be subject to the standards and procedures of Class I
      administrativereviewandshallbereviewedforcompliancewiththeOregonForestPracticeRules.
      Theremovalof threeorfewertreesinacommercialwoodlotwithinany12monthperiodshallnot
      require a tree removal permit.

(.02)  Siteswhichmeetthefollowingcriteriaontheeffectivedateof thisregulationshallbedesignatedas
      commercial woodlots by the Planning Director:

      A.     The site is at least 30,000 square feet.

      B.      Trees have been maintained on the site for the purpose of harvesting.

      C.     Thepropertyfromwhichtheforestspeciesaretobeharvestedareinapropertytaxdeferred
             status based on agricultural and/or forest use under state law provisions for Farm Deferral,
             Forest Land Deferral, or Small Woodlands Deferral.

(.03)  All other sites which potentially meet the criteria of WC 4.610.50(B) shall be reviewed by the
      DevelopmentReviewBoard,whichshalldeterminewhetherasitemeetsthecriteriaforacommer-
      cial woodlot designation when an application is submitted for a tree removal permit.

(.04)  Approvaltoremovetreesaspartof acommercialharvestshallbegrantedif aplanmeetsallof the
      following criteria:

      A.     Trees will be grown and maintained according to an established plan.

      B.      Approvedforestrypracticeswillbefollowed.Forestpracticesincludetheadministrativerules
             as adopted by the Oregon Department of Forestry.

      C.     Harvestedtreeswillbereplantedaccordingtoanestablishedplan.Wheretreesareproposed
             to be removed as a final harvest and no further planting, maintenance, or rotation of trees
             will occur after trees are removed, the applicant shall propose an erosion control and
             revegetation plan for review.

Section  4.620.00. Tree Relocation, Mitigation, or Replacement.

(.01)  Requirement Established. A Type B or C Tree Removal Permit grantee shall replace or relocate
      each removed tree having six inches or greater d.b.h. within one year of removal.

(.02)  BasisForDeterminingReplacement.Thepermitgranteeshallreplaceremovedtreesonabasisof
      onetreereplantedforeachtreeremoved.Allreplacementtreesmustmeasuretwoinchesormore
      in diameter. Alternatively, the Planning Director or Development Review Board may require the
      permitgranteetoreplaceremovedtreesonapercaliperinchbasis,basedonafindingthatthelarge
      size of the trees being removed justifies an increase in the replacement trees required. Except,
      however,thatthePlanningDirectororDevelopmentReviewBoardmayallowtheuseof replace-
      ment Oregon white oaks and other uniquely valuable trees with a smaller diameter.

                                                      CD4:446
                                PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                § 4.620.00

(.03)  ReplacementTreeRequirements. A mitigation or replacement tree plan shall be reviewed by the
      City prior to planting and according to the standards of this subsection.

      A.     Replacement trees shall have shade potential or other characteristics comparable to the
             removed trees, shall be appropriately chosen for the site from an approved tree species list
             suppliedbytheCity,andshallbestateDepartmentof AgricultureNurseryGradeNo.1or
             better.

      B.      Replacement trees must be staked, fertilized and mulched, and shall be guaranteed by the
             permit grantee or the grantee's successors-in-interest for two years after the planting date.

      C.     A "guaranteed" tree that dies or becomes diseased during that time shall be replaced.

      D.     Diversity of tree species shall be encouraged where trees will be replaced, and diversity of
             species shall also be maintained where essential to preserving a wooded area or habitat.

(.04)  All trees to be planted shall consist of nursery stock that meets requirements of the American
      Associationof Nurserymen(AAN)AmericanStandardsforNurseryStock(ANSIZ60.1)fortop
      grade.

(.05)  ReplacementTreeLocation.

      A.    CityReviewRequired.TheCityshallreviewtreerelocationorreplacementplansinorderto
             provideoptimumenhancement,preservationandprotectionof woodedareas.Totheextent
             feasibleanddesirable,treesshallberelocatedorreplacedon-siteandwithinthesamegeneral
             area as trees removed.

      B.    RelocationorReplacementOff-Site.Whenitisnotfeasibleordesirabletorelocateorreplace
             trees on-site, relocation or replacement may be made at another location approved by the
             City.

(.06)  CityTreeFund.Whereitisnotfeasibletorelocateorreplacetreesonsiteoratanotherapproved
      locationintheCity,theTreeRemovalPermitgranteeshallpayintotheCityTreeFund,whichfund
      is hereby created, an amount of money approximately the value as defined by this subchapter, of
      the replacement trees that would otherwise be required by this subchapter. The City shall use the
      City Tree Fund for the purpose of producing, maintaining and preserving wooded areas and
      heritage trees, and for planting trees within the City.

      A.     TheCityTreeFundshallbeusedtooffertreesatlowcostonafirst-come,first-servebasisto
             any Type A Permit grantee who requests a tree and registers with the City Tree Fund.

      B.      In addition, and as funds allow, the City Tree Fund shall provide educational materials to
             assist with tree planting, mitigation, and relocation.

(.07)  Exception. Tree replacement may not be required for applicants in circumstances where the
      Director determines that there is good cause to not so require. Good cause shall be based on a
      consideration of preservation of natural resources, including preservation of mature trees and
      diversity of  ages of  trees. Other criteria shall include consideration of  terrain, difficulty of
      replacement and impact on adjacent property.

                                                       CD4:447
§ 4.620.10                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.620.10. Tree Protection During Construction.

(.01)  Where tree protection is required by a condition of development under Chapter 4 or by a Tree
      MaintenanceandProtectionPlanapprovedunderthissubchapter,thefollowingstandardsapply:

      A.     All trees required to be protected must be clearly labeled as such.

      B.      PlacingConstructionMaterialsNearTree.Nopersonmayconductanyconstructionactivity
             likely to be injurious to a tree designated to remain, including, but not limited to, placing
             solvents, building material, construction equipment, or depositing soil, or placing irrigated
             landscaping, within the drip line, unless a plan for such construction activity has been
             approved by the Planning Director or Development Review Board based upon the recom-
             mendations of an arborist.

      C.     Attachments  to  Trees  During  Construction.  Notwithstanding  the  requirement  of  WC
             4.620.10(1)(A),nopersonshallattachanydeviceorwiretoanyprotectedtreeunlessneeded
             for tree protection.

      D.    ProtectiveBarrier.Beforedevelopment,landclearing,fillingoranylandalterationforwhich
             aTreeRemovalPermitisrequired,thedevelopershallerectandmaintainsuitablebarriersas
             identifiedbyanarboristtoprotectremainingtrees.Protectivebarriersshallremaininplace
             until the City authorizes their removal or issues a final certificate of occupancy, whichever
             occurs first. Barriers shall be sufficiently substantial to withstand nearby construction
             activities. Plastic tape or similar forms of markers do not constitute "barriers." The most
             appropriate and protective barrier shall be utilized. Barriers are required for all trees
             designated to remain, except in the following cases:
             1.     Rights-of-Way and Easements. Street right-of-way and utility easements may be cor-
                    donedbyplacingstakesaminimumof 50feetapartandtyingribbon,plastictape,rope,
                    etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of areas to be cleared.

             2.      Anypropertyareaseparatefromtheconstructionorlandclearingareaontowhichno
                    equipmentwillventuremayalsobecordonedoff asdescribedinparagraph(D)of this
                    subsection, or by other reasonable means as approved by the reviewing authority.

Section  4.620.20. Maintenance and Protection Standards.

(.01)  The following standards apply to all activities affecting trees, including, but not limited to, tree
      protectionasrequiredbyaconditionof approvalonasitedevelopmentapplicationbroughtunder
      this Chapter or as required by an approved Tree Maintenance and Protection Plan.

      A.     Pruningactivitiesshallbeguidedbythemostrecentversionof theANSI300Standardsfor
             Tree,Shrub,andOtherWoodyPlantMaintenance.Informationonthesestandardsshallbe
             available upon request from the Planning Department.

      B.      Topping is prohibited.

             1.      ExceptionfromthissectionmaybegrantedunderaTreeRemovalPermitif necessary
                    for utility work or public safety.

                                                       CD4:448
                               PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                             § 4.640.00

Section  4.630.00. Appeal.

(.01)  The City shall not issue a Tree Removal Permit until approval has been granted by either the
      PlanningDirectorortheDRB.AnyapplicantdeniedaTypeAorBpermitmayappealthedecision
      asprovidedforinreviewof ClassIDevelopmentApplications,orClassIIDevelopmentApplica-
      tions,whicheverisapplicable.DecisionsbythePlanningDirectormaybeappealedtotheDRBas
      providedinWC4.022.DecisionsbytheDRBmaybeappealedtotheCityCouncilasprovidedin
      WC 4.022.

(.02)  TheCityshallnotissueaTreeRemovalPermitapprovedbytheDevelopmentReviewBoarduntil
      15calendardayshavepassedfollowingtheapproval.Thegrantordenialof aTreeRemovalPermit
      maybeappealedtotheCityCouncilinthesamemannerasprovidedforinWC4.022.Anappeal
      mustbefiledinwriting,withinthe15calendardayperiodfollowingthedecisionbeingappealed.
      Thetimelyfilingof anappealshallhavetheeffectof suspendingtheissuanceof apermitpending
      the outcome of the appeal. The City Council, upon review, may affirm, reverse or modify the
      decision rendered by the Development Review Board based upon the same standards of review
      specified for the DRB in the Wilsonville Code.

Section  4.630.10. Display of Permit; Inspection.

The Tree Removal Permit grantee shall conspicuously display the permit on-site. The permit grantee
shall display the permit continuously while trees are being removed or replaced or while activities
authorizedunderthepermitareperformed.ThepermitgranteeshallallowCityrepresentativestoenter
and inspect the premises at any reasonable time, and failure to allow inspection shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter.

Section  4.630.20. Variance for Hardship.

Anypersonmayapplyforavarianceof thissubchapterasprovidedforinSection4.196of thisChapter.

Section  4.630.30. Severability.

If anypartof thisordinanceisfoundbyacourtof competentjurisdictiontobeinvalid,thatpartshall
be severable and the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected.

Section  4.640.00. Violation; Enforcement.

(.01)  The cutting, damaging, or removal of any individual tree without a permit as required by this
      ordinanceconstitutesaviolationpunishableasaseparateinfractionunderWC1.013.Inaddition,
      each violation of a condition or a violation of any requirement of this Chapter shall constitute a
      separate infraction.

(.02)  RetroactivePermit. A person who removes a tree without obtaining a Type A or Type B permit
      may apply retroactively for a permit. In addition to all application requirements of this Chapter,
      the person must be able to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this subchapter, in
      additiontopayingatriplepermitfeeandapenaltypertreeinanamountestablishedbyresolution
      of City Council. Mitigation requirements of this subchapter apply to all retroactive permits.

                                                     CD4:449
§ 4.640.00                                                WILSONVILLE CODE

(.03)  Nuisance Abatement. Removal of a tree in violation of this Chapter is a nuisance and may be
      abated as provided in Sections 6.230 to 6.244, 6.250, and 6.260 of the Wilsonville Code.

(.04)  Withholding Certificate of Occupancy. The City Building Official has the authority to issue a
      stop-work order, withhold approval of  a final plat, or withhold issuance of  a certificate of
      occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this Chapter, including any conditions
      attached to a Tree Removal Permit, have been fully met.

(.05)  Fines. Fines for a violation shall be imposed according to WC 1.012.

(.06)  Mitigation. The City shall require the property owner to replace illegally removed or damaged
      trees. The City may also require a combination of payment and tree replacement.

      A.     The City shall notify the property owner in writing that a violation has occurred and
             mitigationisrequired.Within30daysof thedateof mailingof thenotice,thepropertyowner
             shallprovideamitigationplantotheCity.Theplanshallprovideforreplacementof atreeof
             similar species and size taking into account the suitability of the site and nursery stock
             availability.
      B.      Replacement will be on an inch-for-inch basis computed by adding the total diameter
             measuredatd.b.h.ininchesof theillegallyremovedordamagedtrees.TheCitymayuseany
             reasonablemeanstoestimatethetreelossif destructionof theillegallyremovedordamaged
             treespreventsexactmeasurement.Allreplacedtreesmustbeaminimumtwo-inchcaliper.If
             the mitigation requirements cannot be completed on the property, the City may require
             completion at another approved location. Alternatively, the City may require payment into
             the City Tree Fund of  the value of  the removed tree as established by the Planning
             Department.

Section  4.640.10. Alternative Enforcement.

(.01)  Intheeventthatapersoncommitsmorethanoneviolationof WC4.600.30toWC4.630.00,the
      following alternative sentence may be imposed:

      A.     If apersonhasgainedmoneyorpropertythroughthecommissionof anoffenseunderthis
             section,thenuponconvictionthereof,thecourt,inlieuof imposingafine,maysentencethe
             person to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not to exceed double the amount of the gain
             from the commission of the offense.
      B.      "Gain"isdefinedastheamountof moneyorvalueof propertyderivedfromthecommission
             of theviolation,lesstheamountof moneyorvalueof propertyseizedbyorsurrenderedto
             theCity."Value"shallbethegreaterof themarketvalueorreplacementcostasdetermined
             by a licensed professional in the tree, nursery, or landscape field.

      C.     Any fines collected by the City under this section shall accrue to the City Tree Fund.

Section  4.640.20. Responsibility for Enforcement.

CompliancewiththisChaptershallbeenforcedbytheCityAttorney,theCityAttorney'sdesignee,and
Clackamas County or Washington County law enforcement officers.

                                                      CD4:450
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                      § 4.700

               ANNEXATIONS AND URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY AMENDMENTS

Section  4.700.  Procedures Relating to the Processing of Requests for Annexation and Urban Growth
                   Boundary Amendments.

(.01)  The City of Wilsonville is located within the Portland Metropolitan Area, and is therefore subject
      to regional government requirements affecting changes to the City limits and changes to the Urban
      Growth Boundary (UGB) around Wilsonville. The City has the authority to annex properties as
      prescribed in State law, but the City's role in determining the UGB is primarily advisory to Metro,
      as provided in Oregon Revised Statutes. The following procedures will be used to aid the City
      Council in formulating recommendations to those regional entities.
      A.     Proponents of such changes shall provide the Planning Director with all necessary maps and
             written information to allow for review by City decision-makers. The Planning Director, after
             consultation with the City Attorney, will determine whether each given request is quasi-
             judicial or legislative in nature and will make the necessary arrangements for review based
             upon that determination.

      B.      Written information submitted with each request shall include an analysis of the relationship
             between the proposal and the City's Comprehensive Plan, applicable statutes, as well as the
             Statewide Planning Goals and any officially adopted regional plan that may be applicable.

      C.     The Planning Director shall review the information submitted by the proponents and will
             prepare a written report for the review of the City Council and the Planning Commission or
             Development Review Board. If the Director determines that the information submitted by
             the proponents does not adequately support the request, this shall be stated in the Director's
             staff report.
      D.     If the Development Review Board, Planning Commission, or City Council determine that
             the information submitted by the proponents does not adequately support the request, the
             City Council may oppose the request to the regional entity having the final decision making
             authority.

(.02)  Each quasi-judicial request shall be reviewed by the Development Review Board, which shall make
      a recommendation to the City Council after concluding a public hearing on the proposal, except in
      the following circumstance:

      A.     When an annexation in the Coffee Creek Industrial Design Overlay District is requested
             concurrent with a quasi-judicial Comprehensive Plan Map amendment and/or zone map
             amendment as specified in Section 4.197 (.02)A. and Section 4.198(.02), the annexation shall
             be reviewed by the City Council without prior review or recommendation by the Develop-
             ment Review Board.
             a.      The ordinance adopting such annexation request shall state the annexation expires 120
                    days from Council adoption unless a Stage II Final Plan receives final local approval for
                    the area subject to the annexation. In the event of a LUBA appeal of the final local
                    approval, the 120-day expiration period will be tolled pending completion of the appeal
                    process.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:451
§ 4.700                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              b.      Notwithstanding the process described above an applicant may elect to have the
                     annexation reviewed by the Development Review Board for a recommendation to City
                     Council concurrently with other land use applications for the subject property.
              c.      If the Planning Director anticipates that individuals other than the applicant can be
                     expected to question the requested annexation's compliance with the applicable criteria
                     the Planning Director may require the annexation be first reviewed by the Development
                     Review Board to make a recommendation to City Council.

(.03)  Each legislative request shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall make a
       recommendation to the City Council after concluding a public hearing on the proposal.

(.04)  As applicable, the City Council shall consider the information in the record of the Development
       Review Board or Planning Commission and shall, after concluding a public hearing on the request,
       determine the appropriate course of action. That course of action may be:
       A.     In the case of a proposed amendment to the Regional Urban Growth Boundary: forward its
              recommendation in the form of a Resolution to the Metro Council.

       B.      In the case of a proposed annexation to the City, select from the following as allowed by State
              law (ORS 222):
              1.      Take no action;
              2.      Declare the subject property, or some portion thereof, to be annexed;
              3.      Set the matter for election of the voters residing within the affected territory; or
              4.      Set the matter for election of City voters.

(.05)  The City Council may adopt a development agreement with the owners of  property that is
       proposed for annexation to the City, and such agreement may include an agreement to annex at a
       future date. A development agreement with an agreement to annex shall be subject to the same
       procedural requirement as other annexations in terms of staff report preparation, public review,
       and public hearings.
(Ord. No. 538, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. 812, 2-22-2018)

                                   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Section  4.800.  Wireless Communications Facilities—Permitted, Conditionally Permitted, and Prohibited
                   Uses.

Purpose:

Wireless Communications Facilities ("WCF") play an important role in meeting the communication
needs of the Wilsonville community. This Section aims to balance the proliferation of and need for WCF
with the importance of keeping Wilsonville a livable and attractive City, consistent with City regulations
for undergrounding utilities to the greatest extent possible.

In accordance with the guidelines and intent of Federal law and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
these regulations are intended to: 1) protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:452
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.800

Wilsonville community; 2) preserve neighborhood character and overall City-wide aesthetic quality; and
3) encourage siting of WCF in locations and by means that minimize visible impact through careful site
selection, design, configuration, screening, and camouflaging techniques.

As used herein, reference to Wireless Communications Facilities is broadly construed to mean any
facility, along with all of its ancillary equipment, used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves,
radio or television signals including, but not limited to, antennas, dish antennas, microwave antennas,
small cells, distributed antenna systems ("DAS"), 5G, small cell sites/DAS, and any other types of
equipment for transmission or receipt of signals, including telecommunication towers, poles, and similar
supporting structures, equipment cabinets or buildings, parking and storage areas, and all other
accessory development.

Reference to Small Wireless Facilities (SWF) herein is construed to mean WCF and associated equip-
ment that meet the definition of small wireless facilities as stated in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(I). Reference to
Macro WCF means WCF that do not meet the definition of small wireless facilities.

This Section does not apply to (i) amateur radio stations defined by the Federal Communication
Commission and regulated pursuant to 47 C.F.R. Part 97; or (ii) WCF owned by, or operated solely for,
the City of Wilsonville.

If any provision of this Code directly conflicts with State or Federal law, where State or Federal law
preempts local law, then that provision of this Code shall be deemed unenforceable, to the extent of the
conflict, but the balance of the Code shall remain in full force and effect.

Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed in any way to waive or limit the City's proprietary
rights over its real and personal property, including without limitation any proprietary interest in the
right-of-way. Thus, if it is determined the City has authority to exert greater rights or impose additional
conditions or limitations beyond those set forth in this Section, the City reserves the absolute right to do
so, as it determines appropriate or necessary.
       (.01)  Permitted Uses:
              A.     New towers, poles, and structures for Macro WCF and ancillary facilities thereto are
                     permitted in all of the following locations:
                     1.      Any property owned by the City of Wilsonville, including public right-of-way;
                     2.      Any property owned by the West Linn - Wilsonville School District;
                     3.      Any property owned by the Tualatin Valley Fire District;
                     4.      Any property within an electric utility substation.
       B.      Co-located WCF pursuant to Section 4.802 on all existing, legally established, towers, poles,
              and structures in all zones.

       C.     Modification of existing towers, poles, and structures for WCF and ancillary facilities not
              meeting the co-location requirements of Section 4.802.

       D.     SWF as follows:
                     1.      Attached to an existing structure (i.e., utility pole, tower, streetlight, traffic signal,
                            building, etc.) within the public right-of-way.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:453
§ 4.800                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     2.      Incorporated into a freestanding or replacement structure (i.e., a standalone pole
                            intended to support only the wireless equipment or a replacement pole that
                            supports both the wireless equipment and the other utilities, traffic control or
                            other pre-existing attachments) within the public right-of-way.

                     3.      Attached or mounted to an existing structure (i.e., rooftop, building façade,
                            sports field light, etc.) outside the public right-of-way.

              E.     Satellite communications antennas:

                     1.      Not exceeding one meter in diameter shall be permitted in any zone without
                            requiring Administrative Review.

                     2.      One meter or larger shall be subject to Administrative Review.

       (.02)  Conditional Uses.

              A.     Historical Buildings and Structures. No WCF shall be allowed on any building or
                     structure, or in any district, that is listed on any Federal, State, or local historical
                     register unless it is determined by the Development Review Board that the facility will
                     have no adverse effect on the appearance of the building, structure, or district. No
                     change in architecture and no high visibility facilities are permitted on any such
                     building, any such site, or in any such district.

              B.      Tower or Pole Heights. Towers or poles may exceed the height limits otherwise provided
                     for in the Development Code with compelling justification only. Costs and cost
                     efficiency are not compelling justifications.

              C.     Lighting. If beacon lights or strobe lights are required by the Federal Aviation Admin-
                     istration (FAA) or other applicable authority, the Development Review Board shall
                     review the available alternatives and approve the design with the least visual impact.

              D.     Except as indicated as permitted in (.01) above, WCF can be conditionally permitted in
                     all zones, pursuant to Section 4.184 of the Wilsonville Code.

       (.03)  Prohibited Uses. WCF are prohibited on all lands within the Significant Resource Overlay
              Zone.

       (.04)  Exemptions. The following shall be considered exempt structures or activities under this
              Code Chapter:

              A.     Antennas (including direct-to-home satellite dishes, TV antennas, and wireless cable
                     antennas) used by viewers to receive video programming signals from direct broadcast
                     facilities, broadband radio service providers, and TV broadcast stations regardless of
                     zone capacity.

              B.      Cell on Wheels (COW), which are permitted as temporary uses in nonresidential zones
                     for a period not to exceed 60 days, except that such time period may be extended by the
                     City during a period of emergency as declared by the City, County, or State.

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:454
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.801

             C.     Replacement antennas or equipment, provided the replacement antennas and/or equip-
                    ment have the same function, size, and design to the replaced antenna and/or equip-
                    ment and do not exceed the overall size of  the original approved antenna and/or
                    equipment.

      (.05)  Undergrounding Requirement. The City of  Wilsonville is an underground utility City
             (Undergrounding District) for the purposes of public safety, service reliability, and aesthetic
             design; where these mandatory design standards do not unreasonably preclude WCF by
             requiring undergrounding of all equipment to the maximum extent possible. Therefore, no
             new vertical elements will be allowed on City property if there are existing facilities available
             to reasonably accommodate the WCF, and all equipment other than the antennas shall be
             placed underground to the maximum extent possible. The following shall be used to deter-
             mine maximum extent possible:
             A.     Equipment functional underground;

             B.      Location available to underground near associated antenna; and
             C.     Conflicts with other underground uses as determined by the City.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.801.  Application Requirements.

      In preparing the Application, the applicant should review all provisions of this Code Section,
particularly the portion attached to the Development Review Standards. The WCF Application process
shall include all of the following:

      (.01)  Cable and telecommunication providers that occupy any portion of the City's right-of-way
             are required to enter into a Franchise Agreement with the City. Other utilities, including
             Competitive Local Exchange Competitor carriers are subject to the terms of  the City's
             Privilege Tax Ordinance No. 616. In order to be permitted, an applicant must complete:

             A.     A Site Development Permit Application;
             B.      A Public Works Permit;
             C.     A Building Permit; and
             D.     Enter into a Lease Agreement with the City for use of the public Right-of-Way.

      (.02)  Required for all WCF, including SWF applications:
             A.     Property Owner Signature. The signature of the property owner(s) on City of Wilsonville
                    application forms or a written signed statement from the property owner(s) granting
                    authorization to proceed with the land use application and building permits, pursuant
                    to WC Section 4.009.

             B.      Speculation. No Application for a WCF shall be approved from an applicant that
                    constructs WCF and leases tower space to service providers that is not itself a wireless
                    service provider, unless the applicant submits a binding written commitment or exe-
                    cuted lease from a service provider to utilize or lease space on the WCF.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:455
§ 4.801                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              C.     Geographical Survey. The applicant shall identify the geographic service area for the
                     proposed WCF, including a map showing all of the applicant's existing sites in the local
                     service network. The applicant shall identify technically feasible alternative site loca-
                     tions within the geographic service area.
                     1.      Prior to the issuance of any building permits, applicants for WCF shall provide a
                            copy of the corresponding FCC Construction Permit or license for the facility
                            being built or relocated, if required.
                     2.      The applicant shall include a vicinity map clearly depicting where, within a
                            one-half mile radius, any portion of the proposed WCF could be visible, and a
                            graphic simulation showing the appearance of the proposed WCF and all acces-
                            sory and ancillary structures from two separate points within the impacted
                            vicinity, accompanied by an assessment of potential mitigation and screening
                            measures. Such points are to be mutually agreed upon by the Planning Director
                            or the Planning Director's designee and the applicant.
              D.     Visual Impact, Technological Design Options, and Alternative Site Analysis. The appli-
                     cant shall provide a visual impact analysis showing the maximum silhouette, viewshed
                     analysis, color and finish palette, and proposed screening for all components of the
                     facility. The analysis shall include photo simulations and other information as neces-
                     sary to determine visual impact of the facility as seen from multiple directions. The
                     applicant shall include a map showing where the photos were taken. The applicant shall
                     include an analysis of alternative sites that would meet City design and locational
                     standards and alternative technological design options for the WCF, within and outside
                     of the City, which are capable of meeting the same service objectives as the preferred
                     site with an equivalent or lesser visual impact. If a new tower or pole is proposed as a
                     part of the proposed WCF, the applicant must demonstrate the need for a new tower
                     and pole and why existing locations or design alternatives, such as the use of microcell
                     technology, cannot be used to meet the identified service objectives. Documentation
                     and depiction of all steps that will be taken to screen or camouflage the WCF to
                     minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility must be submitted.
              E.     Application Narrative. The Application shall include a detailed narrative of all of the
                     equipment and components to be included with the WCF, including, but not limited to,
                     antennas and arrays; equipment cabinets; back-up generators; air conditioning units;
                     poles; towers; lighting; fencing; wiring, housing; and screening. The applicant must
                     provide the number of proposed WCF at each location and include renderings of what
                     the WCF will look like when screened. The Application must contain a list of all
                     equipment and cable systems to be installed, including the maximum and minimum
                     dimensions of all proposed equipment. Wilsonville is an Undergrounding District,
                     meaning that the City will require any utility that can be fully or partially located
                     underground to the maximum extent possible to help preserve the aesthetic appearance
                     of  the right-of-way and community and to prevent aboveground safety hazards.
                     Therefore, all components of the WCF must be undergrounded to the extent reason-
                     ably feasible. Those components of the WCF that must be above ground must be

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:456
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.801

                     identified by type of facility, dimension of facility, with proposed screening to reduce to
                     the maximum extent possible the visual impact of aboveground facilities and equip-
                     ment. A written narrative of why any portion of the WCF must be above ground is
                     required.

              F.      Safety Hazards. Any and all known or expected safety hazards for any of the WCF
                     facilities must be identified and the applicant who must demonstrate how all such
                     hazards will be addressed and minimized to comply with all applicable safety codes.

              G.     Landscaping. The Application shall provide a landscape plan, drawn to scale, that is
                     consistent with the need for screening at the site, showing all proposed landscaping,
                     screening and proposed irrigation (if applicable), with a discussion of how proposed
                     landscaping, at maturity, will screen the site. Existing vegetation that is proposed to be
                     removed must be clearly indicated and provisions for mitigation included.

              H.     Height. The Application shall provide an engineer's diagram, drawn to scale, showing
                     the height of  the WCF and all of  its above-ground components. Applicants must
                     provide sufficient evidence that establishes that the proposed WCF is designed to the
                     minimum height required to meet the carrier's coverage objectives. If a tower or pole
                     height will exceed the base height restrictions of the applicable zone, this narrative shall
                     include a discussion of the physical constraints (topographical features, etc.) making
                     the additional height necessary. The narrative shall include consideration of design
                     alternatives, including the use of multiple sites or designs that would avoid the need for
                     the new WCF or over zone height WCF. Except as noted in (a) and (b) below, the
                     maximum height allowed in the right-of-way is 50 feet.
                     1.      The maximum height for a freestanding SWF in the public right-of-way is no
                            more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures in the right-of-way.

                     2.      When collocated on an existing structure in the public right-of-way, the SWF and
                            the existing structure (including the antenna and any equipment enclosures
                            contained within the structure) shall not exceed 50 feet or more than ten percent
                            of the existing structure or nearby structures, whichever is greater.

              I.      Construction. The Application shall describe the anticipated construction techniques
                     and time frame for construction or installation of the WCF. This narrative must include
                     all temporary staging, site access, and the types of vehicles and equipment to be used.

              J.       Maintenance. The Application shall describe the anticipated maintenance and moni-
                     toring program for the WCF, including antennas, back-up equipment, poles, paint, and
                     landscaping; and a description of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency
                     of service, personnel needs, equipment needs and potential safety impacts of such
                     maintenance.

              K.     Noise/Acoustical Information. The Application shall provide manufacturer's specifica-
                     tions for all noise-generating equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up
                     generators, and a depiction of the equipment location in relation to adjoining proper-

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:457
§ 4.801                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                     ties. The applicant shall provide a noise study prepared and sealed by a qualified
                     Oregon-license Professional Engineer that demonstrates that the WCF will comply
                     with intent and goals of Section 6.204 et seq. of this Code.

              L.     Lease. The site plan shall show the lease area of the proposed WCF.
              M.    FCC License and Radio Frequency Safety Compliance. The Application shall provide a
                     copy of the applicant's FCC license and/or construction permit, if an FCC license
                     and/or construction permit is required for the proposed facility. The applicant shall
                     provide documentation showing that the party responsible for radio frequency trans-
                     missions is in planned or actual compliance with all FCC RF emissions safety stan-
                     dards and guidelines at 47 C.F.R. § 1.1307 et seq. and FCC Office of Engineering
                     Technology Bulletin 65.

              N.     Lighting and Marking. The Application shall describe any proposed lighting and
                     marking of the WCF, including any required by the FAA.

              O.     Co-Location Feasibility. A feasibility study for the co-location of  any WCF as an
                     alternative to new structures must be presented and certified by an Oregon-licensed
                     Professional Engineer. Co-location will be required when determined to be feasible.
                     The feasibility study shall include:
                     1.      An inventory, including the location, ownership, height, and design of existing
                            WCF within one-half mile of the proposed location of a new WCF. The planning
                            director may share such information with other applicants seeking permits for
                            WCF, but shall not, by sharing such information, in any way represent or warrant
                            that such sites are available or suitable.
                     2.      Documentation of the efforts that have been made to co-locate on existing or
                            previously approved towers, poles, or structures. The applicant shall make a good
                            faith effort to contact the owner(s) of all existing or approved towers, poles, or
                            structures and shall provide a list of all owners contacted in the area, including
                            the date, form, and content of such contact.
                     3.      Documentation as to why co-location on existing or proposed towers, poles, or
                            commercial structures within 1,000 feet of the proposed site is not practical or
                            feasible. Co-location shall not be precluded simply because a reasonable fee for
                            shared use is charged or because of  reasonable costs necessary to adapt the
                            existing and proposed uses to a shared tower. The Planning Director and/or
                            Development Review Board may consider expert testimony to determine whether
                            the fee and costs are reasonable when balanced against the market and the
                            important aesthetic considerations of the community.

              P.      Engineering Report. An Application for a new WCF, whether co-located or new, shall
                     include, as applicable, a report from an Oregon licensed Professional Engineer docu-
                     menting the following:
                     1.      A description of  the proposed WCF height and design, including technical,
                            engineering, and other pertinent factors governing selection of  the proposed

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:458
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.801

                           design. A cross-section of the proposed WCF structure shall be included. The
                           engineer shall document whether the structure is at its maximum structural
                           capacity and, if not, the additional weight the structure could support.
                    2.      Documentation that the proposed WCF will have sufficient structural integrity
                           for the proposed uses at the proposed location, in conformance with the mini-
                           mum safety requirements of the State Structural Specialty Code and EIA/TIA
                           222 (Structural Standards for Communication and Small Wind Turbine Support
                           Structures), latest edition at the time of the application.
                    3.      A description of mitigation methods which will be employed to avoid ice hazards,
                           including increased setbacks, and/or de-icing equipment, if required by any safety
                           law, regulation, or code.
                    4.      Evidence that the proposed WCF will comply with all applicable requirements of
                           the Federal Aviation Administration, the Aeronautics Section of the Oregon
                           Department of Transportation, and the Federal Communications Commission.

             Q.     All SWF applications must demonstrate compliance with all requirements in Section 2
                    "Design Elements" of the "City of Wilsonville Small Wireless Facility Infrastructure
                    Design Standards".

             R.     The Planning Director may request any other information deemed necessary to fully
                    evaluate and review the information provided in the application.

      (.03)  Additional Application Requirements for new Macro WCF applications.

             A.     Parking. The Application shall provide a site plan showing the designated parking
                    areas for maintenance vehicles and equipment, if any. No parking of maintenance
                    vehicles and equipment parking shall be permitted in any red curb zone, handicap
                    parking zone, or loading zone.

             B.      Co-Location. In the case of new multi-user towers, poles, or similar support structures,
                    the applicant shall submit engineering feasibility data and a letter stating the applicant's
                    willingness to allow other carriers to co-locate on the proposed WCF.

             C.     Recordation Requirements. If a new WCF is approved, the owner shall be required, as
                    a condition of approval, to:
                    1.      Record the conditions of approval specified by the City with the Deeds Records
                           Office in the Office of the County Recorder of the county in which the WCF is
                           located;
                    2.      Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a
                           potential shared use applicant;
                    3.      Negotiate in good faith for shared use by others; and
                    4.      Such conditions shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent purchasers
                           of the WCF.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:459
§ 4.802                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

Section  4.802.  Co-Location.

In order to encourage shared use of towers, poles, or other facilities for the attachment of WCF, pursuant
to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. 1455(a), no conditional use permit shall be required for the addition of
equipment, provided that:

       (.01)  There is no change to the type of tower or pole.
       (.02)  All co-located WCF shall be designed in such a way as to be visually compatible with the
              structures on which they are placed.

       (.03)  All co-located WCF must comply with the conditions and concealment elements of the
              original tower, pole, or other facility upon which it is co-locating.

       (.04)  Shall not disturb, or will mitigate any disturbed, existing landscaping elements.

       (.05)  Does not entail excavation or deployment outside site of current facility where co-location is
              proposed.

       (.06)  All co-located WCF, and additions to existing towers, poles, or other structures, shall meet
              all requirements of  the State of  Oregon Structural Specialty Code and EIA/TIA 222
              (Structural Standards for Communication and Small Wind Turbine Support Structures),
              latest edition at the time of the application. A building permit shall be required for such
              alterations or additions. Documentation shall be provided by an Oregon-licensed Profes-
              sional Engineer verifying that changes or additions to the tower structure will not adversely
              affect the structural integrity of the tower.

       (.07)  Additional Application Requirements for Co-Location:
              A.     A copy of the site plan approved for the original tower, pole, or other base station
                     facility to which the co-location is proposed.
              B.      A site survey delineating development on-the-ground is consistent with the approved
                     site plan.
(Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.803.  Development Review Standards.

All WCF shall comply with the following Development Review standards, unless exempted under State
or Federal law:

       (.01)  The following development standards are applicable to all WCF and SWF applications:
              A.     Maximum Number of High Visibility Facilities Per Lot or Parcel. No more than one
                     high visibility WCF is allowed on any one lot or parcel of  five acres or less. The
                     Development Review Board may approve exceeding the maximum number of high
                     visibility WCF per lot or parcel if one of the following findings is made through a Class
                     III review process: (1) co-location of additional high visibility WCF is consistent with
                     neighborhood character, (2) the provider has shown that denial of an application for
                     additional high visibility WCF would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting service
                     because the WCF would fill a significant gap in coverage and no alternative locations

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:460
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.803

                     are available and technologically feasible, or (3) the provider has shown that denial of
                     an application for additional high visibility WCF would unreasonably discriminate
                     among providers of functionally equivalent services. In such cases, the Development
                     Review Board shall be the review authority for all related applications.
              B.      Height. The height of WCF is regulated as follows:
                     1.      The tower or pole height of a freestanding WCF in R, PDR and FDA-H zones
                            shall not exceed 50 feet, except the following:
                            a.      FDA-H zoned property occupied by the City Wastewater Treatment Plant
                                   and the PDR zoned property occupied by the Elligsen Road Water Reser-
                                   voir shall be exempted from the height limitations of the subject zones.
                            b.      Small Wireless Facilities in the public right-of-way. SWF in the public
                                   right-of-way shall not exceed the height permitted under WC 4.801(.02)H.
                     2.      In all other zones, towers or poles shall not exceed the height limits provided for
                            in the Development Code without compelling justification. Costs and cost effi-
                            ciency are not compelling justifications.
              C.     WCF Adjacent to Residentially Designated Property. In order to ensure public safety, all
                     WCF located adjacent to any property designated as residential in Wilsonville shall be
                     set back from all residential property lines by a distance at least equal to the maximum
                     height of the facility including any antennas or other appurtenances attached thereto.
                     The setback shall be measured from that part of  the WCF that is closest to the
                     neighboring residentially designated property.
              D.     Accessory Building Size. Within the public right-of-way, no above-ground accessory
                     buildings shall be permitted. Outside of the public right-of-way, all accessory buildings
                     and structures permitted to contain equipment accessory to a WCF shall not exceed 12
                     feet in height unless a greater height is necessary and required by a condition of
                     approval to maximize architectural integration. Each accessory building or structure is
                     limited to 200 square feet, unless approved through a Conditional Use Permit.
              E.     Utility Vaults and Equipment Pedestals. Within the public right-of-way, utility vaults
                     and equipment pedestals associated with WCF must be underground to the maximum
                     extent possible.
              F.      Visual Impact. All WCF shall be designed to minimize the visual impact to the
                     maximum extent possible by means of placement, screening, landscaping, and camou-
                     flage. All WCF shall also be designed to be compatible with existing architectural
                     elements, building materials, and other site characteristics. All WCF shall be sited in
                     such a manner as to cause the least detriment to the viewshed from other properties.
                     The use of radomes and/or other camouflage techniques acceptable to the City to
                     conceal antennas, associated equipment and wiring, and antenna supports is required.
              G.     Color Schemes. For the sake of visual impact, no wooden poles are allowed except
                     Small Wireless Facilities on existing poles with high voltage power lines that would
                     require thermal hydraulic cooling if undergrounded. Color schemes must be approved
                     by the City to best camouflage with the surrounding landscape.

Supp. No. 6                                              CD4:461
§ 4.803                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

              H.     Antennas. Façade­mounted antennas shall be architecturally integrated into the build-
                     ing design and otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible. As appropriate, antennas
                     shall be located entirely within an existing or newly created architectural feature so as to
                     be completely screened from view. Façade­mounted antennas shall not extend more
                     than two feet out from the building face. Roof-mounted antennas shall be constructed
                     at the minimum height possible to serve the operator's service area and shall be set back
                     as far from the building edge as possible or otherwise screened to minimize visibility
                     from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties.
              I.      Noise. Noise from any equipment supporting the WCF shall meet the requirements of
                     City Code Section 6.204—Noise.
              J.       Signage. No signs, striping, graphics, or other attention-getting devices are permitted
                     on any WCF except for warning and safety signage with a surface area of no more than
                     three square feet. Except as required by law, all signs are prohibited on WCF except for
                     one non-illuminated sign, not to exceed two square feet, which shall be provided at the
                     main entrance to the WCF, stating the owner's name, the wireless operator(s) if
                     different from the owner, and address and a contact name and phone number for
                     emergency purposes. WCF may be placed entirely behind existing street or building
                     signs as one method of camouflage.
              K.     Traffic Obstruction. Maintenance vehicles servicing facilities located in the public
                     right-of-way shall not park on the traveled way or in a manner that obstructs traffic. No
                     maintenance vehicle parking shall be permitted in red curb zones, handicap zones, or
                     loading zones.
              L.     Reserved.
              M.    Sidewalks and Pathways. Cabinets and other equipment shall not impair pedestrian use
                     of sidewalks or other pedestrian paths or bikeways on public or private land and shall
                     be screened from view. Cabinets shall be undergrounded, to the maximum extent
                     possible.
              N.     Lighting. WCF shall not include any beacon lights or strobe lights, unless required by
                     the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable authority. If beacon
                     lights or strobe lights are required, the Development Review Board shall review the
                     available alternatives and approve the design with the least visual impact. All other site
                     lighting for security and maintenance purposes shall be shielded and directed down-
                     ward, and shall comply with the City's outdoor lighting standards in City Code Section
                     4.199, unless otherwise required under Federal law.
              O.     Paint and Finish. Towers, poles, antennas, and associated equipment shall either
                     maintain a galvanized steel finish or be painted a non-reflective, neutral color, as
                     approved by the Planning Director or Development Review Board, to minimize
                     visibility. Attached communication facilities shall be painted so as to be identical to or
                     compatible with the existing structure. Towers more than 200 feet in height shall be
                     painted in accordance with the Oregon State Aeronautics Division and Federal Avia-
                     tion Administration rules. Applicants shall attempt to seek a waiver of OSAD and

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:462
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.803

                     FAA marking requirements. When a waiver is granted, towers shall be painted and/or
                     camouflaged in accordance with subsection (.01), above. All ancillary facilities shall be
                     colored or surfaced so as to blend the facilities with the surrounding natural and built
                     environment.
              P.      Use of Concealments. Concealments are customized structures engineered to cover cell
                     towers, antennas, DAS equipment and beautify them and make them either less visible
                     or more pleasing to have in the landscape. Applicant shall present a proposal for
                     concealment intended to meet the foregoing goal.
              Q.     Public Works Standards. Additional applicable construction and design standards are
                     as set forth in the City's 2015 Public Works Standards.
              R.     Compliance With All Laws. Every WCF shall comply with all local, state, and federal
                     laws, codes, and regulations including without limitation to the Americans with Dis-
                     abilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
              T.      Security Fencing. WCF or towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing
                     not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
                     device. Fencing shall be compatible with other nearby fencing. Such requirements may
                     be waived for attached WCF.
              U.     Landscaping. Landscaping shall be placed around the outside perimeter of the security
                     fencing and shall consist of fast growing vegetation that can be expected to reach a
                     minimum height of six feet and form a continuous hedge within two years of planting.
                     Drought tolerant landscaping materials shall be required and otherwise meet the
                     landscaping standards of City Code Section 4.176. Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of
                     guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed 20 feet in height and would not affect
                     the stability of the guys should they be uprooted. Landscaping shall be compatible with
                     other nearby landscaping.
              V.      Conflict with Right-of-Way. No WCF shall be located within a planned or existing
                     public right-of-way, unless it is specifically designed for the purpose in a way that will
                     not impede pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic and the installation of any sidewalk
                     or path that is a planned future improvement.
              W.     Change to Approved WCF. Any change to or expansion of a WCF that will in any way
                     change the physical appearance of the WCF will require a new application.
       (.02)  Additional development standards applicable to new Macro WCF:
              A.     Site Size. The site on which a transmission tower/pole is located shall be of a sufficient
                     shape and size to provide all required setbacks as specified in this Code Section. Towers
                     or poles only as permitted herein may be located on sites containing other principal
                     uses in the same buildable area as long as all of the other general requirements of this
                     Code Section are met.
              B.      Separation and Setbacks.
                     1.      WCF shall be set back from any other property line by a distance at least equal to
                            the maximum height of the facility including any antennas or other appurte-

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:463
§ 4.803                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

                            nances attached thereto unless this requirement is specifically waived by the
                            Planning Director or the Development Review Board for purposes of mitigating
                            visual impacts or improving compatibility with other uses on the property.
                     2.      A guyed tower located on sites containing other principal uses must maintain a
                            minimum distance between the tower and other principal uses of the greater of
                            100 percent breakpoint or 25 feet, unless this requirement is specifically waived by
                            the Planning Director or Development Review Board for purposes of mitigating
                            visual impacts or improving compatibility with other uses on the property.
                     3.      WCF mounted on rooftops or City-approved alternative tower structures shall be
                            exempt from these minimum separation requirements. However, WCF and re-
                            lated equipment may be required to be set back from the edge of the roof line in
                            order to minimize their visual impact on surrounding properties and must be
                            screened.
                     4.      WCF towers and poles are prohibited in the required front yard, back yard, or
                            side yard setback of any lot in any zone, and no portion of any antenna array shall
                            extend beyond the property lines. For guyed towers or poles, all guy anchors shall
                            be located outside of the setback from all abutting properties.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023; Ord. No. 899, § 2(Exh. A), 8-4-2025)

Section  4.804.  Review Process and Approval Standards.

(.01)  Class I Process. The following WCF are allowed with the approval of a WCF Site Plan to be
       reviewed by the Planning Director pursuant to a Class I process under City Code Section 4.030
       (.01) A:
       A.     Small Wireless Facilities in the public right-of-way.
       B.      WCF Co-locations meeting the criteria outlined in Wilsonville Code Section 4.802.

(.02)  Class II Process. The following WCF are allowed with the approval of a WCF Site Plan to be
       reviewed by the Planning Director pursuant to a Class II process under City Code Section
       4.030(.01)B:
       A.     New Macro WCF proposed in the following locations excepted as noted in (.01) above:
              1.      Any property owned by the City of Wilsonville, including public right-of-way;
              2.      Any school property owned by any public school district;
              3.      Any fire station property owned by any fire district;
              4.      Any property within an electric utility substation.
       B.      WCF Co-locations not meeting the criteria outlined in Wilsonville Code Section 4.802.
       C.     Satellite dishes larger than one meter.

Supp. No. 6                                               CD4:464
                                  PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                         § 4.805

(.03)  Conditional Use Permit Requirements. Applications for WCF in all other locations and situations,
       including moderate or high visibility facilities that exceed the height limit of the applicable zone,
       shall also require a Conditional Use Permit to be reviewed by the Development Review Board. In
       addition to the approval standards in City Code Section 4.030, the applicant shall demonstrate that
       the WCF Site Plan approval standards in this Section are met.

(.04)  Approval Criteria. The Development Review Board shall approve the use and WCF Site Plan for
       any of the WCF listed in subsections of this Section upon a determination that the following
       criteria are met:

       A.     The height of the proposed WCF does not exceed the height limit of the underlying zoning
              district, or does not increase the height of an existing facility.

       B.      The location is the least visible of other possible locations and technological design options
              that achieve approximately the same signal coverage objectives.

       C.     The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of  the proposed WCF will be
              compatible with adjacent uses, residences, buildings, and structures, with consideration given
              to:

              1.      Scale, bulk, coverage, and density;

              2.      The suitability of the site for the type and intensity of the proposed WCF; and

              3.      Any other relevant impact of the proposed use in the setting where it is proposed.

       D.     All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by the City, to serve the
              proposed WCF; and

       E.     The proposed WCF complies with all of the general regulations contained in this Section
              4.800—4.812.

(.05)  Conditions of Approval. The City may impose any other reasonable condition(s) deemed necessary
       to achieve compliance with the approval standards, including designation of an alternate location.
       If compliance with all of the applicable criteria cannot be achieved through the imposition of
       reasonable conditions, the Application shall be denied.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)

Section  4.805.  Damage, Destruction, or Interference to Other Utilities.

In the installation of any WCF within the right-of-way, care must be taken to install in such a way that
does not damage, interfere with, or disturb any of the several other utilities that may already be located
in the area. Any damage done to such other utilities must be immediately reported to both the City and
the owner of the damaged utility, and must be promptly repaired by the permittee or the utility owner,
with the permittee being responsible for all costs of repair, including any extra charges that may be
assessed for emergency repairs. Failure to notify the City and the damaged utility provider will result in

Supp. No. 3                                               CD4:465
§ 4.805                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

revocation of the WCF. When approving the location for a WCF, the location of other utilities, or the
need for the location of other utilities, within the right-of-way must be considered before approval to
locate the WCF will be given in order to ensure those other services to the public are not disrupted.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), adopted October 2, 2023, repealed § 4.805 and renumbered the
remaining sections, 4.806 through 4.814 as 4.805 through 4.813. The original § 4.805 pertained to
exemptions and derived from Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019.

Section  4.806.  Maintenance.

The following maintenance requirements apply to WCF, as applicable:

       (.01)  All landscaping shall be maintained at all times and shall be promptly replaced if  not
              successful.
       (.02)  If a flag pole is used for camouflaging a facility, flags must be flown and must be properly
              maintained at all times. If a United State Flag is flown, it shall be illuminated as required by
              the United States Flag Code.
       (.03)  All WCF sites shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter.

       (.04)  A WCF shall be kept clean and painted in good condition at all times. Rusting, dirt, or
              peeling facilities are prohibited.
       (.05)  All equipment cabinets shall display a legible operator's contact number for reporting
              maintenance problems.

       (.06)  Any graffiti on a WCF must be promptly removed at Owner's expense.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.807.  Permit Tracking.

The permittee of each permit issued to it by the City shall retain full and complete copies of all permits
and other regulatory permits issued in connection with this facility. In the event that the City cannot
locate any such full and complete permits or other regulatory approvals in its official records, and the
permittee fails or refuses to retain or produce full and complete permits or other regulatory approvals in
the permittee's files, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an examination of
the missing documents will be resolved against the permittee.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.808.  Inspections.

(.01)  The City or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a WCF is located
       to inspect the facility for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the Building Code
       and all other construction standards provided by the City and Federal and State law.

(.02)  As a condition of approval and prior to final inspection of the WCF, the applicant shall submit
       evidence, such as photos, to the satisfaction of the City, sufficient to prove that the WCF is in

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:466
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                        § 4.811

       substantial conformance with photo simulations provided with the application. Nonconformance
       shall require modification to compliance within 30days or the WCF, or nonconforming compo-
       nents, must be removed.

(.03)  The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
       WCF owner. In the event such inspection results in a determination that violation of applicable
       construction and maintenance standards set forth by the City has occurred, remedy of  the
       violation may include cost recovery for all costs incurred in conforming and processing the
       violation.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.809.  Preexisting WCF.

WCF that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this Chapter shall be allowed to continue their use as
they presently exist. This Code does not make lawful any WCF that are not fully approved on the date the
ordinance codified in this Code is adopted and those pending WCF will be required to meet the
requirements of this Code. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such lawful preexisting WCF.
Lawfully existing WCF may be replaced as long as the replacement is in the exact location of the WCF
being replaced and is of a construction type identical in height, width, weight, lighting, and painting.
Any changes or modifications to a replacement WCF shall not be considered routine maintenance, shall
be treated as new construction, and shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.810.  Ancillary Facilities.

Unenclosed storage of materials is prohibited. Other building facilities, including offices, vehicle storage
areas, or other similar uses not necessary for transmission or relay functions, are prohibited unless a
separate land use application for such is submitted and approved.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.811.  Abandoned Facilities; Discontinuation of Use.

The following requirements apply to the abandonment and/or discontinuation of use for all WCF:

       (.01)  All WCF located on a utility pole shall be promptly removed at the operator's expense at any
              time a utility is scheduled to be placed underground or otherwise moved.

       (.02)  All operators who intend to abandon or discontinue the use of any WCF shall notify the City
              of such intentions no less than 60 days prior to the final day of use.

       (.03)  WCF shall be considered abandoned 90 days following the final day of use or operation.

       (.04)  All abandoned WCF, including ancillary equipment, shall be physically removed by the
              facility owner no more than 90 days following the final day of use or of determination that
              the facility has been abandoned, whichever occurs first.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:467
§ 4.811                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       (.05)  The City reserves the right to remove any WCF that are abandoned for more than 90 days, at
              the expense of the facility owner.
       (.06)  Any abandoned site shall be restored to its natural or former condition. Grading and
              landscaping in good condition may remain.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.812.  Mandatory and Automatic Permit Conditions.

All WCF permits, whether issued by the City or approved by operation of law, shall be subject to the
standard conditions of approval provided in this Section. The City may add, remove or modify any
conditions of approval as necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare.
       (.01)  Permit Duration. The permit will automatically expire ten years from the issuance date.
       (.02)  Compliance with All Applicable Laws. Permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with
              all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, ordinance or other rules.
       (.03)  Inspections; Emergencies. The City or its designee may enter onto the facility area to inspect
              the facility upon reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all
              inspections. The City reserves the right to enter or direct its designee the facility and support,
              repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility
              threatens imminent harm to persons or property.
       (.04)  Contact Information for Responsible Parties. Permittee shall at all times maintain accurate
              contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone
              number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. All such
              contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the Planning Director within
              one business day of permittee's receipt of the Planning Director's written request.
       (.05)  Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government owner of the private
              property upon which the tower, base station, and/or SWF is installed shall defend, indemnify
              and hold harmless the City, its agents, officers, officials and employees (i) from any and all
              damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands,
              law suits, writs of mandamus and other actions or proceedings brought against the City or its
              agents, officers, officials or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or
              annul the City's approval of the permit, and (ii) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries,
              losses, costs and expenses and any and all claims, demands, law suits or causes of action and
              other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or
              property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the
              permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one's agents, employees,
              licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors. The permittee shall be
              responsible for costs of determining the source of the interference, all costs associated with
              eliminating the interference, and all costs arising from third party claims against the City
              attributable to the interference. In the event the City becomes aware of any such actions or
              claims the City shall promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:468
                                 PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT                                                       § 4.813

             reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the City shall have the right to
             approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the
             City's defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse City
             for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the City in the course of the
             defense.

      (.06)  Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to
             avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the
             construction, operation, maintenance, modification and removal of the facility.

      (.07)  General Maintenance. Permittee must comply with Section 4.805 at all times.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Section  4.813.  Mandatory and Automatic Permit Conditions of Approval for Section 6409(a).

Any Section 6409(a) Co-Location/Modification Permit approved or deemed-granted by the operation of
federal law shall be automatically subject to the conditions of approval described in this Section.

      (.01)  Permit Duration. The City's grant or grant by operation of  law of  a Section 6409(a)
             Co-Location/Modification Permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the
             underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. The City's grant or grant
             by operation of law of a Section 6409(a) Co-Location/Modification Permit will not extend
             the permit term for any conditional use permit, land use permit or other underlying
             regulatory approval and its term shall be coterminous with the underlying permit or other
             regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station.

      (.02)  Accelerated Permit Terms Due to Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent
             jurisdiction invalidates any portion of  Section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that interprets
             Section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for any Section 6409(a)
             Co-Location/Modification Permit(s), such permit(s) shall automatically expire one year
             from the effective date of  the judicial order, unless the decision would not authorize
             accelerated termination of previously approved Section 6409(a) Co-Location/Modification
             Permits. A permittee shall not be required to remove its improvements approved under the
             invalidated Section 6409(a) Co-Location/Modification Permit when it has submitted an
             application for either a Conditional Wireless Facilities Permit or an Administrative Wireless
             Facilities Permit for those improvements before the one (1) year period ends. The Planning
             Director may extend the expiration date on the accelerated permit upon a written request
             from the permittee that shows good cause for an extension.

      (.03)  No Waiver of Standing. The City's grant or grant by operation of law of a Section 6409(a)
             Co-Location/Modification Permit does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any
             standing by the City to challenge Section 6409(a), any FCC rules that interpret Section
             6409(a) or any Section 6409(a) Co-Location/Modification Permit.

      (.04)  Compliance with All Applicable Laws. Permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with
             all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, ordinance or other rules.

Supp. No. 3                                              CD4:469
§ 4.813                                                     WILSONVILLE CODE

       (.05)  Inspections; Emergencies. The City or its designee may enter onto the facility area to inspect
              the facility upon reasonable notice to the permittee. The permittee shall cooperate with all
              inspections. The City reserves the right to enter or direct its designee the facility and support,
              repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility
              threatens imminent harm to persons or property.
       (.06)  Contact Information for Responsible Parties. Permittee shall at all times maintain accurate
              contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone
              number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. All such
              contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the Planning Director upon
              permittee's receipt of the Planning Director's written request.
       (.07)  Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the non-government owner of the private
              property upon which the tower/and or base station is installed shall defend, indemnify and
              hold harmless the City, its agents, officers, officials and employees (i) from any and all
              damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and expenses and from any and all claims, demands,
              law suits, writs of mandamus and other actions or proceedings brought against the City or its
              agents, officers, officials or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or
              annul the City's approval of the permit, and (ii) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries,
              losses, costs and expenses and any and all claims, demands, law suits or causes of action and
              other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or
              property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the
              permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one's agents, employees,
              licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors. The permittee shall be
              responsible for costs of determining the source of the interference, all costs associated with
              eliminating the interference, and all costs arising from third party claims against the City
              attributable to the interference. In the event the City becomes aware of any such actions or
              claims the City shall promptly notify the permittee and the private property owner and shall
              reasonably cooperate in the defense. It is expressly agreed that the City shall have the right to
              approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the
              City's defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse City
              for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the City in the course of the
              defense.
       (.08)  Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to
              avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the
              construction, operation, maintenance, modification and removal of the facility.
       (.09)  General Maintenance. Permittee must comply with Section 4.805 at all times.
(Ord. No. 831, 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 882, § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-2023)
Editor’s note— See the editor's note at § 4.805.

Supp. No. 3                                                CD4:470
