201.2.23 Driveways
Access to private property shall be permitted with the use of driveway curb cuts. The
following specifies the minimum requirements for driveways:
a. Driveways shall conform to Detail No. RD-1090, Detail No. RD-1095, or Detail No.
RD-1100 of these standards; or to Detail No. RD-1085 of these standards on non-
curbed streets.
b. Driveways shall be designed to meet all applicable rules and regulations of Title III of
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA).
c. Driveways shall not be permitted on streets with existing non-access reserve strips, or
where plat restrictions limit access to the right-of-way, or as set forth in the TSP and
Planning Code.
d. For commercial or industrial developments, driveway access shall be a minimum of
100 feet from the nearest intersection (as measured from near edge of driveway drop
City of Wilsonville Transportation Standards
Public Works Standards – 2017 Section 2 Page 90
to near face of curb at intersection), unless otherwise approved in writing by the
City’s authorized representative.
e. For residential developments, driveway access from the nearest intersection shall be a
minimum of 50 feet (as measured from near edge of driveway drop to near face of
curb at intersection) unless otherwise approved in writing by the City's authorized
representative.
f. Driveways on arterial and collector streets shall be minimized, where practicable, and
shall be placed first on a lower classification street.
g. Access spacing, including driveways alleys, & streets, shall be in conformance with
Table 2.12
.
1. Spacing between driveways is measured between the nearest edges of driveway
drops.
2. The desired access spacing shall be adhered to unless otherwise approved by the
City’s authorized representative.  Deviating from the desired access spacing may
be allowed by the City’s authorized representative when aligning with existing
driveways, topography constraints, property limitations and safety related issues.

Table 2.12.  ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
Roadway
Functional
Classification
Access Spacing
Desired
Access Spacing
Minimum
Major Arterial 1320 feet 1000 feet
Minor Arterial 1000 feet 600 feet
Collector 300 feet 100 feet
Local Street Access to Each Lot

3. To modify the minimum access spacing, the City Engineer may require an access
study prepared and certified by a professional Traffic Engineer registered in the
State of Oregon.  The access study shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Review of site driveway spacing and design.
(b) Evaluation of traffic impacts adjacent to the site within a distance specified
by the City Engineer.
(c) Review of all modes of transportation to the site.
City of Wilsonville Transportation Standards
Public Works Standards – 2017 Section 2 Page 91
(d) Mitigation measures where access spacing standards are not met, including
but not limited to medians, turning restrictions, driveway consolidation, and
shared driveways.

h. Driveways and alleys shall be constructed to align with existing or planned streets, if
the driveway intersects with a street controlled with an existing or planned traffic
signal, intersects with an existing or planned arterial or collector street, or would be
an extension of an existing or planned street or major driveway.  If in the opinion of
the City’s authorized representative, the driveway and opposing street cannot align
due to topography, existing features, or geographic conditions, the driveway and
opposing street shall be in alignment as close as possible.  Offset alignment that
creates danger to the traveling public, such as over-lapping left turn movements, will
not be allowed under any circumstances.

i. The City’s authorized representative may limit the number or location of connections
to a street, impose access restrictions where the roadway authority requires mitigation
to alleviate safety or traffic operations concerns.
j. Driveways shall not be wider than necessary to safely accommodate projected peak
hour trips and turning movements, and shall be designed to minimize crossing
distances for pedestrians in accordance with Detail No. RD-1080, Detail No. RD-
1085, Detail No. RD-1090, Detail No. RD-1095, and Detail No. RD-1100 of these
standards.  The City’s authorized representative shall make the final determination of
maximum driveway width on a case-by-case basis.
k. The City’s authorized representative may require a driveway to extend to one or more
edges of a parcel and be designed to allow for future extension and inter-parcel
circulation to allow access to adjacent parcels as part of future development.  The
owner(s) of the subject site may be required to record an access easement for future
joint use of the approach and driveway.
l. Access driveways shall have a minimum width of 12 feet for one-way traffic and 20
feet for two way traffic.  Driveway widths shall meet requirements of TVF&R.
m. Parking lot drive aisles shall align with the approved access driveway.  A clear drive
aisle, containing no parking spaces or intersecting drive aisles, shall be provided at all
parking lot access driveways in accordance with Detail No. RD-1105 of these
standards and as follows:
1. Within 50 feet of the back of sidewalk or right-of-way boundary, whichever is
greater, for access driveways with less than 100 Average Daily Trips (ADT).
2. Within 100 feet of the back of sidewalk or right-of-way boundary, whichever is
greater, for access driveways with 100 or more Average Daily Trips (ADT).
3. The clear drive aisle shall not have a width greater than the approved access
driveway.
City of Wilsonville Transportation Standards
Public Works Standards – 2017 Section 2 Page 92
4. The City Engineer may reduce the clear drive aisle length to not less than 20 feet
from the back of sidewalk or right-of-way boundary, whichever is greater.  The
City Engineer may require submission of additional information, including but
not limited to a traffic study prepared and certified by a registered professional
Traffic Engineer in the State of Oregon.  Any reduction in the required clear drive
aisle length shall be based on the following:
(a) Queuing areas are designed such that vehicles do not obstruct a driveway,
fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way.
(b) On-site circulation is designed in such a way as to not create a safety hazard
by reducing the clear drive aisle length.
n. Detectable warning surfaces shall be provided at the junction between the pedestrian
route and the vehicular route where driveways have yield or stop control or
incorporate curb ramps or blended transitions into the driveway design.
o. Grading on driveway approaches shall not exceed 5H:1V within the PUE.
p. Concentrated surface runoff shall not be allowed to flow from private
commercial/industrial property, private access drives, or private alley accessways
across public sidewalk and into the public right-of-way.
q. Driveways intersecting with roads shall meet the minimum sight distance
requirements as specified in Section 201.2.22
, “Sight Distance.”
r. Where the addition or modification of a driveway access requires the removal of
center landscape median, a new center landscape median shall be constructed at a
different location within the City of Wilsonville.  The new center landscape median
shall be equal in length to the removed center landscape median.  The City’s
authorized representative shall determine the appropriate location for construction of
the new center landscape median.
s. Where driveway requirements and standards cannot be met due to the location or
configuration of an existing building, structure, topography or geographic feature, the
existing driveway shall be brought into conformance to the greatest extent feasible as
determined by the City’s authorized representative.
