12.50.400  Bicycle Parking/Bicycle and Pedestrian Circulation and Connectivity.
Bicycle parking and bicycle and pedestrian circulation and connectivity include the following
sections:
12.50.410 Bicycle Parking
12.50.420 Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation
12.50.430 Connectivity and Design Standards at or Near Transit Stops
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022)
12.50.410  Bicycle Parking.
A. Purpose. Standards for bicycle parking encourage bicycle use, help to reduce principal
reliance on the automobile, and increase bicyclists' safety and security.
B. Applicability. Bicycle parking shall be provided in conjunction with all new developments,
expansions of existing development or changes of use, except those exempt housing types
and uses listed in subsection C below.
C. Exemptions.
1. The following housing types are exempt from bicycle parking requirements:
a. Detached single dwellings, including manufactured dwellings;
b. Accessory dwelling units;
c. Live-work dwellings;
d. Middle housing; and
e. Any housing units constructed with individual assigned and enclosed garage or
carport spaces or storage spaces 80 square feet or larger.
2. The following uses are exempt from bicycle parking requirements:
a. Home occupations;
b. Mobile and/or temporary businesses as defined in Municipal Code Chapter 5.08;
and
c. Expansions of pre-existing commercial, industrial or institutional uses which are
less than 50% of the existing net floor area or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less.
D. Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required.
1. Except as listed in subsection C above, all new development or expansions of existing
development shall provide the minimum number of bicycle parking spaces specified in
Tables 12.50.410-1 through 12.50.410-5. New free-standing commercial, industrial or
institutional Uses requiring vehicle parking shall provide at least 2 bicycle parking spaces.
Multiple tenant buildings or developments may consolidate bicycle parking based on the
aggregated net square footage, pursuant to Subsection 12.50.410.G.8.
 12.50.410DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:75Supp. No. 1
2. For expansions of existing commercial, industrial or institutional uses larger than 50% of
the current net floor area or 3,000 square feet (whichever is less), bicycle parking shall be
calculated based on total net square footage rather than the expansion area.
3. Bicycle parking for changes in use shall be calculated based upon the requirements for
the new use.
4. For any use not specifically mentioned in Tables 12.50.410-1 through 12.50.410-5,
bicycle parking requirements shall be the same as for the use which is most similar to the
use not specifically mentioned, as determined by the Director pursuant to Section
12.80.050.
E. Adjustments to Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. The Review Authority may adjust minimum
bicycle parking provided for changes of Use or expansions of an existing use under Subsection
12.80.156.D.8.
  Table 12.50.410-1:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Housing Types or Residential Uses
(spaces are per dwelling unit unless otherwise specified)
Use Category Number of Spaces Required
Household Living
Multiple Dwelling Structure None if exempt under Subsection
12.50.410.C.1; otherwise 0.25
Group Living 0.25/resident
Residential Services None
Residential Business (for residential portion only) 1 in Zone A; none in Zone B

  Table 12.50.410-2:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Commercial Uses
(required spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Commercial Lodging
All Uses 0.13/room
Commercial Parking
Surface Parking Lots None
Structured Parking 1/20 vehicle spaces provided
Commercial Recreation
Indoor facilities 1.5
12.50.410 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:76Supp. No. 1
Table 12.50.410-2:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Commercial Uses
(required spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Court sports 1/court
Outdoor facilities (with bleachers) 1/60 ft. of bench length
Outdoor facilities (without bleachers) 1/field
Durable Goods Sales
All Uses 0.05
Eating and Drinking Establishments
Fast food 2
Casual dining 0.25
Fine dining 0.13
Educational Services (parking calculated per FTE student or employee)
All Uses 0.01
Office
General office 0.1
Medical office 0.2
Retail Products and Services
Minor Assembly Facilities 0.1
All other Uses
1/2,500 square feet up to 50,000
sq. ft.;
plus 1/5,000 square feet thereafter
Self-Service Storage
All Uses None
Vehicle Service and Repair
All Uses 0.075
Note: Minimum 2 spaces required for all free-standing Uses: See Subsection 12.50.410.D.1.
 12.50.410DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:77Supp. No. 1
Table 12.50.410-3:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Industrial Uses
(spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Industrial Services
All Uses 0.1
Manufacturing and Production
All Uses 0.08
Solid Waste Treatment and Recycling
All Uses 0.05
Vehicle Storage
All Uses 0.01/employee
Warehouse and Freight Movement
All Uses 0.01
Wholesale Sales
All Uses 0.08
Note: Minimum 2 spaces required for all free-standing Uses: See Subsection 12.50.410.D.1.

  Table 12.50.410-4:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Institutional Uses
(spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Colleges and Universities (measured per classroom)
All Uses 4
Community Services
All Uses 0.2
Detention Facilities (measured per bed)
All Uses 0.01
Hospitals (measured per bed)
All Uses 0.1
12.50.410 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:78Supp. No. 1
Table 12.50.410-4:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Institutional Uses
(spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Assembly Facilities (measured by maximum occupancy* in largest room)
All Uses 0.02
Schools (measured per classroom)
Elementary school (grades K—5) 3
Middle school (grades (6—8) 2
High School (grades 9—12) 2
  * As determined by the Building Official.
Note: Minimum 2 spaces required for all free-standing Uses: See Subsection 12.50.410.D.1.

  Table 12.50.410-5:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Infrastructure and Utility Facilities Uses
(required spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Aviation Uses
Hangars (measured per aircraft space) None
All other aviation uses per commercial or industrial
requirements
Parks and Open Areas
Indoor facilities 2
Court sports 0.15/court
Outdoor facilities (with bleachers) 1/60 ft. of bench length
Outdoor facilities (without bleachers) 1/field
Playgrounds To be determined during land use
approval process. Nature parks; natural open space
Public Safety Facilities (measured per FTE employee)
All uses
 12.50.410DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:79Supp. No. 1
Table 12.50.410-5:
Required Bicycle Parking Spaces for Infrastructure and Utility Facilities Uses
(required spaces are per 1,000 sq. ft. Net Floor Area unless otherwise specified)
Use Type Number of Spaces Required
Surface Alternative Transportation Facilities
Park and ride facilities 1/20 of provided spaces
Maintenance yards None
All other uses None
Telecommunication Facilities
All uses None
Utility Facilities
All uses None
F. Bicycle Parking Location.
1. Bicycle parking shall be located on site in secure and accessible locations near a main
building entrance.
2. Outdoor bicycle parking shall be visible from on-site buildings or the street. Indoor bicycle
parking for non-residential uses shall be located on the first floor. Indoor bicycle parking
may be allowed on any floor in multi-story residential structures.
3. If required, bicycle parking location(s) shall be shown on the off-street vehicle parking and
loading plans submitted to the Review Authority.
G. Bicycle Parking: Improvements.
1. Space Size. Spaces shall be at least 6 feet long and 2½ feet wide. An access aisle at least
5 feet wide shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of parking.
Each required space shall be accessible without moving another bicycle.
2. Security. Secure parking shall be provided as either a lockable storage enclosure or a
stationary rack to which bicycles can be locked. All racks, lockers or other facilities shall
be securely anchored to the ground or to a structure. Racks shall be designed so that
every bicycle can be locked by the frame and secured to prevent falling or wheel damage.
3. Separation Required. Bicycle parking shall be separated from motor vehicle parking and
maneuvering areas by a barrier or a distance of at least 5 feet.
4. Connectivity Required. Outside bicycle parking shall be connected to each building's
main building entrance by pedestrian accessible walkways. Outside bicycle parking also
shall have reasonably direct hard-surfaced connections to public rights-of-way and to
existing and proposed pedestrian/bicycle accessways.
12.50.410 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:80Supp. No. 1
5. Signage. Required parking shall be signed and reserved for bicycle parking only. If a
bicycle parking area is not plainly visible from the main building entrance, a directional
sign shall be posted at the building entrance indicating the location of the bicycle parking
area.
6. Sidewalk Obstruction Not Permitted. Bicycle parking shall not obstruct required minimum
widths of sidewalks or pedestrian connections. As part of a Type II or III review, the
Review Authority may allow bicycle parking on the public sidewalk only in locations where
it would not obstruct required minimum widths or conflict with access to doorways.
7. Landscaping or Usable Open Space Occupancy Not Permitted. Bicycle parking shall not
occupy curbside landscape strips, landscape buffers or required usable open space.
8. Distribution between Buildings. Bicycle parking may be distributed as the Review
Authority determines appropriate as part of a Type II or III review to serve multiple
buildings in a development. If a building has 2 or more main building entrances, the
Review Authority may require bicycle parking to be located to serve all main building
entrances.
9. Coverage Required/Encouraged. Coverage or shelter is encouraged for all required
bicycle parking. If more than 20 bicycle parking spaces are required, at least 25% of the
spaces shall be covered or enclosed. If covered, the overhead clearance shall be at least
7 feet. Coverage can be provided through roof extensions, overhangs, awnings, arcades,
carports or enclosures. Similar means of coverage can be approved through a Type II or
III review. Covered parking can also be provided within a parking structure, garage, or
bicycle locker, under a separate roof, or in a designated area within a building or
residential complex.
10. Security at Transit Stations. At transit transfer stations and park-and-ride lots, at least
20% of the required spaces shall be lockers and at least 50% of the remaining required
spaces shall be covered or enclosed.
(Ord. No. 6488, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), 12-3-2024; Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6323 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6322 § 1,
2019; Ord. 6294 § 1, 2019; Ord. No. 6508, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-2025)
12.50.420  Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation.
A. Purpose. On-site and off-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation standards are intended to
provide connections which minimize out-of-direction travel between buildings and existing
public rights-of-way, pedestrian/bicycle accessways and other on-site pedestrian facilities.
B. Applicability. Except as provided in subsection C below, the standards of this section shall
apply to all Type II, Type III, and new development projects that include more than ½ acre of
new off-street surface parking on a lot or parcel.
C. Exceptions and Exemptions.
1. Certain Land Use Applications Exempt. The following land use applications are exempt
from the requirements of this section:
a. Development Review or land division applications for single detached or middle
housing developments;
 12.50.420DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:81Supp. No. 1
b. Floodplain Activities;
c. Significant Natural Resource Permits; and
d. Cultural Resource Alterations.
2. Certain Land Uses Exempt. The following land Uses are exempt from the requirements
of this section:
a. Car washes
b. Commercial parking facilities, except commercial parking structures within 400 feet
of a proposed or existing transit station
c. Golf courses
d. Greenhouses
e. Heavy equipment sales
f. Manufactured home sales
g. Vehicle service and repair Uses without associated convenience stores, except
retail or wholesale Uses selling parts and accessories without on-site installation
h. Vehicle sales, leasing, rental or storage
i. Solid waste transfer stations
j. Truck stops
D. Standards — On-Site Facilities.
1. Connections Required. New development shall provide on-site pedestrian and bicycle
circulation systems as follows:
a. Connecting the new development to abutting residential uses, neighborhood activ-
ity centers, usable open space, parking lots, and transit stops;
b. Connecting the main building entrance of each building to the nearest public
sidewalk or walkway leading to a public sidewalk; and
c. Stubbing accessways to abutting vacant land or to developed land without pedestrian/
bicycle connections.
2. Direct Routing. Pedestrian and bicycle accessways shall be reasonably direct.
3. Clustering. Where practicable, new commercial, Mixed-Use and office developments
shall facilitate on-site pedestrian circulation by clustering buildings and creating separate
accessways through the site and parking areas.
4. ADA Access. On-site pedestrian circulation systems shall include accessways and
facilities for handicapped persons, consistent with applicable federal and state require-
ments, and with emphasis wherever practicable on providing continuous, uninterrupted
routes.
12.50.420 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:82Supp. No. 1
5. Improvements. On-site accessways shall be improved to the following standards:
a. Accessways shall be hard surfaced, which includes pervious surfacing techniques,
well-drained, and at least 5 feet in unobstructed width, except as provided in
paragraph b, below.
b. Accessway width shall be increased to 7 feet if the walkway abuts perpendicular or
angled parking spaces unless the spaces are equipped with wheel stops pursuant
to Subsection 12.50.360.C.3.
c. Accessway surface material shall contrast visually with adjoining surfaces.
d. Where accessways are parallel to and abut a vehicular access aisle, the accessway
shall be raised or separated from the access aisle by a raised curb, bollards,
landscaping or other physical barriers. Where raised accessways are used, the
ends shall be equipped with curb ramps.
6. On-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflicts
through any or all of the following measures or their equivalents:
a. Separating pedestrian accessways through the site and parking areas;
b. Minimizing accessway crossings of driveways; or
c. Marking pedestrian crossings with changes in elevation, paving texture, color, or
material. Crossing markings shall contrast and clearly delineate the crossing or
walkway at any time of day or night and shall be improved consistent with ADA and
the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
E. Standards — Off-Site Facilities. Off-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation is only required in
South Hillsboro per Subsection 12.65.420.B.
(Ord. No. 6488, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), 12-3-2024; Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022)
12.50.430  Connectivity and Design Standards at or Near Transit Stops.
A. Purpose. Major and minor transit stops are defined in Section 12.01.500. Pedestrian improve-
ments at transit stops encourage use of transit, which reduces carbon emissions, improves
traffic efficiency on public streets, and provides transportation options for transportation
disadvantaged persons. In this section "at a major or minor transit stop" means a property line
of the building site is not more than 200 feet from the transit stop. "Near a major or minor transit
stop" means a property line of the building site is on an intersecting street not more than 300
feet from the transit stop. Both distances in this section are measured as walked by a
pedestrian.
B. Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all Type II and Type III development
projects located at or near a transit stop and along a transit street that meet 1 or more of the
following:
1. New multiple dwelling structure; or
2. New non-residential development; or
 12.50.430DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:83
3. Non-residential development that includes more than 1,000 square feet of reconstructed
retail, commercial, office, or institutional floor area.
C. Exceptions. The following land uses are exempt from the standards of this section.
1. Car washes;
2. Commercial parking facilities, excluding commercial parking structures within 400 feet of
a transit station;
3. Golf courses;
4. Greenhouses;
5. Durable goods sales;
6. Vehicle service and repair, excluding associated convenience stores and vehicle parts
and accessories sales without on-site installation;
7. Vehicle storage;
8. Solid waste transfer stations;
9. Truck stops; and
10. Any other use located at or near a minor or major transit stop, where access to the transit
stop would require crossing a collector street or an arterial street and a pedestrian
crossing is not available.
D. Standards Applicable to Development at or Near Minor Transit Stops.
1. Applicable development projects at or near a minor transit stop shall provide either a
transit stop on-site or a pedestrian connection from the development to the nearest transit
stop along the transit street.
2. Transit stop improvements shall include at least 1 of the following improvements:
a. A dedicated area within the public right-of-way, or an easement within the site, for a
passenger shelter;
b. An accessible passenger area, compliant with Chapter 11 of the Oregon Structural
Specialty Code as adopted by the City;
c. Lighting;
d. Passenger seating for at least 3 people; and/or
e. A passenger shelter as approved by the Transit Agency.
3. To meet the requirement in paragraph D.1, above, the pedestrian connection must be a
continuous, unobstructed, reasonably-direct route between the 2 points that is intended
and suitable for pedestrian use. On developed parcels, pedestrian connections shall be
hard-surfaced. In parks and natural areas, pedestrian connections may be soft-surfaced
pathways.
4. Required transit stop or connection improvements shall be installed concurrent with
development construction.
12.50.430 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:84
E. Standards Applicable to Development at or Near Major Transit Stops. Applicable development
projects at or near a major transit stop shall meet the following standards:
1. Main building entrances for new retail commercial, office and institutional buildings
located at or near a major transit stop shall be oriented towards the transit street or the
street intersecting the transit street. A building meets this standard if the entrance directly
faces the transit street or the intersecting street, or if the entrance is linked to the transit
street or the intersecting street by an on-site pedestrian connection.
a. If the site fronts on more than 1 transit street, or on both a transit street and an
intersecting street, the building shall have a main entrance oriented to either:
i. One of the transit streets;
ii. The intersecting street; or
iii. The corner where the 2 transit streets or the transit and the non-transit street
intersect.
b. If the building façade length on the transit street is 300 feet or more, the building
shall have 2 or more building entrances facing the transit street. The Review
Authority may approve a Minor or Major Adjustment to this standard under Section
12.80.154 or 12.80.156.
2. Building entrances at or near a major transit stop or facing on a plaza shall have weather
protection features to protect pedestrians, including, but not limited to, arcades, roofs,
porches, alcoves, porticos and/or awnings. The use of continuous, on-site weather
protection features or structures between building entrances and adjacent transit streets,
streets intersecting transit streets, or transit stops is encouraged.
3. New retail, commercial or office buildings located within 30 feet of a transit street, a street
intersecting a transit street, or a major transit stop, shall include changes in relief on 35%
of their façades facing such a street or transit stop. Such changes in relief may include
windows, lobbies, covered pedestrian entrances, display windows, cornices, bases,
fluted masonry, combinations of such treatments, or other pedestrian-friendly treatments.
4. New retail, commercial, office or institutional buildings located at a major transit stop shall
provide all of the following transit-supportive improvements:
a. A plaza at either the major transit stop or at the intersection of the adjacent transit
street and an intersecting street;
b. Locate buildings within 20 feet of the front property line closest to the major transit
stop, the transit street or a street intersecting the transit street;
c. An accessible passenger area, compliant with Chapter 11 of the Oregon Structural
Specialty Code as adopted by the City;
d. A dedicated area within the public right-of-way, or an easement within the site, for a
passenger shelter if requested by the transit agency, to the degree which the
 12.50.430DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:85
requested easement has a clear nexus with and is proportional to the scale,
intensity and reasonably expected level of transit ridership generated from the
building;
e. Passenger seating or a passenger shelter as approved by the Transit Agency; and
f. Lighting at the transit stop.
5. All development shall provide a pedestrian connection between the transit stop and the
main building entrance(s) on the site that is continuous, unobstructed, reasonably-direct
route between the 2 points that is intended and suitable for pedestrian use. On developed
parcels, pedestrian connections shall be hard-surfaced. In parks and natural areas,
pedestrian connections may be soft-surfaced pathways.
6. Pursuant to subparagraph 4.b, above, if a building is set within 20 feet of the front property
line, no off-street parking will be allowed in the front setback. A single vehicle circulation
lane may be permitted in the front setback only if no practicable alternative is available
and if driveway crossings are provided for pedestrian safety consistent with Subsection
12.50.420.D.5.
7. Vehicle parking on corner lots at or near a major transit stop shall not be located adjacent
to street intersections.
F. Redevelopment of Parking. Applications for development at or near major transit stops which
include surface parking fields larger than 50 spaces shall include a conceptual redevelopment
plan indicating how the excess spaces could be redeveloped in the future. Omission of specific
redevelopment plans for the excess parking spaces shall not be the basis for denying the
application.
(Ord. No. 6488, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), 12-3-2024; Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6250 § 1,
2017; Ord. 6149 § 1, 2015; Ord. 6120 § 1, 2015)
12.50.430 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:86
12.50.500  Access and Street Standards.
Access and street standards include the following sections:
12.50.510 Purpose, Applicability and Exceptions
12.50.520 Street Connectivity and Access
12.50.530 Public Streets and Alleys Design and Improvement
12.50.540 Private Streets: Design and Improvement
12.50.550 Sidewalk Widths; Design and Location
12.50.560 Street Trees
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022)
12.50.510  Purpose, Applicability and Exceptions.
A. Purpose. Comprehensive Plan Section 20 Transportation calls for development of a city street
system that meets several goals: safety; multi-modality; trip reduction; congestion manage-
ment; efficient freight movement; livability; and accessibility. The standards in this section are
intended to implement these goals by establishing requirements for street improvements in
and adjacent to land use developments which will generate the users of and demand for this
street system.
B. Applicability.
1. These standards apply to all Zoning Review applications, Non-Temporary Emergency
Shelter applications, Type II and Type III land use applications, and Expedited and Middle
Housing Land Divisions on sites adjacent to existing public streets and/or developments
which are required to provide new public or Private streets, alleys or common driveways.
In addition to these standards, the City has also adopted Public Works Design and
Construction Standards (D & C Standards) that apply to public improvement constructed
within the City. The D & C Standards provide detailed construction requirements consis-
tent with this Code.
2. These standards may require any or all of the following:
a. Dedication of right-of-way adequate to meet the requirements of the Transportation
System Plan (TSP); the D & C Standards; or the requirements of Subchapters 12.60
through 12.67 in certain plan districts;
b. Street improvements on interior street systems and adjacent existing streets,
adequate to meet the requirements of the TSP; the D & C Standards; or the
requirements of Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67 in certain plan districts;
c. Payment of a fee-in-lieu of construction pursuant to the D & C Standards, at the
direction of the City Engineer; and/or
d. Execution of acceptable financial guarantees for improvements deferred at the
direction of the City Engineer; and/or
 12.50.510DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:87
e. Execution of waivers of remonstrance against improvements deferred at the
direction of the City Engineer. Required waivers of remonstrance shall be recorded
by the City, and shall be effective for 10 years following the date of execution.
C. Exceptions.
1. On County roads or State highways, the road standards of those jurisdictions supersede
these requirements.
2. Where the D & C Standards are more specific than the standards in this section, those
standards apply.
3. The standards of this section shall not be enforced as a condition of approval on new
applications for single detached or middle housing residential building permits unless a
previous applicable land use approval provides otherwise.
4. The standards of this section may be modified by the City Engineer upon finding that the
otherwise required right-of-way dedications and/or street improvements would not meet
applicable legal requirements with respect to the scale or scope of the approved land use
development.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6250 § 1, 2017; Ord. 6110 § 7, 2015)
12.50.520  Street Connectivity and Access.
A. Applicability. The standards of this section apply to:
1. Any Type II or Type III development that results in the construction of a street;
2. A land division that is not a Middle Housing Land Division and that:
a. Is located on a site that is 1.75 acres or larger in size; or
b. Abuts a parcel upon which there is a street that has been "stubbed" to the proposed
development site.
B. Through Street Connectivity Required.
1. Applicable development shall provide a street system that meets the block length
standards in subsections B or C, as applicable, and provides access to the following:
a. Abutting residential developments;
b. Abutting undeveloped property; and
c. Abutting neighborhood activity centers.
2. The following factors shall be considered in establishing location, grade and width of new
internal streets:
a. Connections to existing streets as required in subsection C below;
b. Topographical conditions and natural resource corridors;
c. Existing and identified future transit routes and pedestrian/bicycle accessways; and
d. The proposed use of land to be served by the streets.
12.50.510 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:88
3. Intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves proposed for the internal street system
shall be consistent with the D & C Standards.
C. Street Connectivity and Block Length Requirements in Standard Zones.
1. New internal streets within a development shall connect to all existing or planned stubbed
streets that abut the site.
2. Unless exempted under Subsection C.3 below, full street connections spaced not more
than 530 feet apart shall be provided in all contiguous vacant and/or underdeveloped
sites 5 gross acres or larger planned or zoned for residential or mixed-use development.
3. Full street connections are not required where barriers prevent their construction or
require different street connection spacing; in such cases, pedestrian and bicycle
connections shall be provided as described in subsection D below. Such barriers include
the following:
a. Topography;
b. Railroad right-of-way;
c. Freeway right-of-way;
d. Pre-existing development patterns;
e. Streams, wetlands or waterways regulated under Metro UGM Functional Plan Title
3; and/or
f. Significant Natural Resources regulated under Section 12.27.200.
4. Except where precluded by the barriers listed in subsection C.3, above, maximum block
lengths between local and collector streets shall be 1,000 feet, and the maximum
perimeter of blocks formed by local and collector streets shall be 2,750 feet.
5. Within ½ mile of existing neighborhood activity centers or transit stops, maximum block
lengths shall be 600 feet, and the maximum perimeter of blocks formed by local and
collector streets shall be 1,800 feet.
6. Where the connectivity analysis indicates that larger block lengths or perimeters within a
proposed development would deter pedestrian and bicycle travel, the Review Authority
may require construction of additional pedestrian accessways within such blocks where
appropriate.
D. Street Connectivity and Block Length Requirements in Light Rail and Mixed-Use Zones.
1. On sites meeting either of the following criteria, new internal streets and alleys shall be
configured in a grid connecting to existing or planned streets:
a. Vacant or underdeveloped sites 3.7 gross acres or larger; or
b. Sites where existing or planned streets and alleys are stubbed to the perimeter
property line.
 12.50.520DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:89Supp. No. 1
2. Unless precluded by barriers as described in subsection C.3, above, blocks in undevel-
oped areas shall include alleys consistent with the proposed street grid to allow use of
rear-loaded garages and accessory dwelling units and to provide access for utility and
garbage services.
3. The street grid system shall be reasonably straight and direct and shall avoid unneces-
sary curves. Cul-de-sac streets are not permitted unless street continuation is precluded
by barriers as described in subsection C.3, above.
4. In the vicinity of a transit station or major transit stop, streets and alleys shall be laid out
to provide direct and continuous routes to the transit station or stop, or to a street in an
adjacent development.
5. Maximum block perimeter lengths created by the street and alley pattern shall be 1,600
feet.
E. Connectivity Standards for Pedestrian and Bicycle Accessways Where Through Streets Are
Not Feasible. Pedestrian accessways shall meet the standards listed below. Accessways used
as secondary fire access or utility corridors shall also meet the additional standards in
subsection F, below.
1. Accessways shall be created within public rights-of-way, public tracts, or private tracts
with public access easements. Such rights-of-way, tracts, or easements shall be at least
15 feet wide.
2. Accessway entry points shall align with pedestrian crossing points on abutting streets
and with abutting street intersections.
3. Accessways shall not exceed 300 feet in length between streets.
4. Accessways shall be sufficiently straight that both end points are visible from any point on
the accessway.
5. Accessways shall have no horizontal obstructions and a 9-foot, 6-inch high vertical
clearance. Additional clearance shall be provided on secondary fire accessways as
required in subsection F below.
6. Accessway surface improvements shall be at least 10 feet in width. Improvements shall
be impervious pavement (asphalt or concrete), unless pervious pavement has been
approved by the Review Authority and the City Engineer based on usage and site
conditions.
7. Accessway surfaces shall drain stormwater runoff to the side or sides. Paving materials,
storm drainage, shoulder treatment, and landscaping for accessways are subject to
approval by the City Engineer and the Director.
8. Accessways shall be lighted as required in Section 12.50.240. Lighting shall be installed
at both end points and may also be required at intermediate points as determined by the
City Engineer. Lighting on accessways shall be shielded to minimize glare and unnec-
essary diffusion into the sky and onto neighboring properties, especially into significant
natural resource areas.
12.50.520 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:90Supp. No. 1
9. Accessways shall have a slope of 5% or less.
10. Accessways shall be fenced and screened along adjacent property with 1 or both of the
following improvements:
a. A minimum 5-foot high fence. To meet this standard, wooden fences must be built of
pressure-treated structural members with a pressure treated cap rail; and/or
b. A thick vegetation screen of evergreen shrubs or climbers planted either adjacent to
a new fence meeting the standard in subsection a, above, or to an existing private
fence on the adjacent property. To meet this standard, evergreen plant species must
be low maintenance varieties, capable of 42 inches height within 3 years of planting
without irrigation. Native species are encouraged; nuisance species are Not Per-
mitted. Evergreen species with mature heights taller than 4 feet shall be avoided.
Plant species and spacing are subject to approval by the Review Authority.
11. To prohibit access by motorized vehicles (except motorized wheelchairs) accessways
shall be constructed with gates, removable lockable posts, bollards or barriers as
approved by the Fire Department.
F. Additional Standards for Accessways Used as Secondary Fire Access or Utility Corridor. In
addition to the standards in subsection E, above, accessways that also serve as secondary
emergency vehicle accesses or utility corridors shall meet the following additional standards:
1. The accessway shall have at least 13 feet 6 inches (13
� 6 ) vertical clearance or other
clearance as approved by the Fire Marshal.
2. The accessway shall have a minimum 20-foot paved surface within a 20-foot wide
right-of-way, tract, or easement. Reduced width secondary fire access accessways may
be proposed subject to approval by the City Engineer and the Fire Marshal.
3. Pervious pavement may be permitted by the Review Authority, subject to approval by the
City Engineer and the Fire Marshal.
G. Ownership, Liability and Maintenance of Accessways. To ensure accessway maintenance
over time, a maintenance agreement shall be recorded that specifically requires present and
future property owners to provide for liability and maintenance of the accessways to City
standards.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6323 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6120 § 1, 2015; Ord. No. 6508,
§ 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-2025)
12.50.530  Public Streets and Alleys Design and Improvement.
A. General Standards and Requirements.
1. The Review Authority shall condition approvals of land use applications adjacent to
existing public streets and/or required to provide new public streets or alleys to provide
adequate right-of-way and improvements to streets, sidewalks, bike routes and bike-
ways, consistent with the TSP, the Public Works Development and Construction (D & C)
Standards, and Transportation Committee policy.
 12.50.530DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:91Supp. No. 1
2. The Review Authority shall also consider future needs for street widening and other
transportation improvements in the vicinity of the proposed development that would
mitigate traffic impacts generated by the proposed development. The Review Authority
may require off-site improvements, including, but not limited to: lighting; signalization;
turn lanes; medians; on-street parking; traffic islands; paving; curbs and gutters; side-
walks; bikeways; storm drainage systems; or facilities needed due to the anticipated
vehicular and pedestrian traffic generation from the proposed development.
3. Narrower designs for local streets may be permitted with City Engineer approval.
Reduced width street designs shall comply with applicable D & C Standards.
4. Where site conditions are favorable to stormwater infiltration, "green street" designs are
encouraged and may be used. In these cases, deviation from the street standards in this
Code or in the D & C Standards may be approved by the City Engineer. Design elements
and facilities which require City Engineer approval for use in the public right-of-way
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Increased numbers of street trees;
b. Vegetated islands within street improvements;
c. Reduced improvement widths at stream crossings; and/or
d. Multi-functional open storm drainage in lieu of conventional curb-and-gutter sys-
tems.
5. Except as provided under paragraph 6 below, public utility easements (PUEs) for public
and private underground utilities (including gas, electric, telephone and cable communi-
cations conduits or duct banks) shall be provided adjacent to all public rights-of-way. The
width of the PUEs shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
6. If private utilities cannot be located in a PUE due to setbacks, the City Engineer may
permit placement in the public right-of-way under the provisions of a City franchise
agreement.
7. All street sections, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights and street trees shall be
constructed and installed consistent with the D & C Standards unless alternative plan
district standards are specified in Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67.
B. Street Classifications and Improvements in Standard Zones.
1. Consistency with TSPs. The street descriptions in this section reflect and implement the
street classifications on the TSP Functional Classification Map. Traffic capacity volumes
within each classification provide an order of magnitude distinction between classifica-
tions, and are generally consistent with the Washington County Transportation Plan.
"Improvement width" as specified in the classification description includes: required
travel lanes and curb and gutter components; additional median improvements (land-
scaped and/or left turn lane); bicycle lanes; on-street parking spaces; and stormwater
quality measures as permitted or required in a land use approval.
12.50.530 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:92Supp. No. 1
2. Applicability to Public Streets. These standards apply to streets which are or will be
dedicated to the City. Developers may choose to construct private streets at a lesser
standard pursuant to Section 12.50.540.
3. Functional Capacity Retained. The street standards contained in this section may be
varied with City Engineer approval, but the functional classification, projected volumes
and bike path plan must be accommodated in the variation. However, adjacent to
properties designated and/or zoned mixed-use, standards for street sections may be
adjusted to provide on-street parking, increased sidewalk width, or to substitute bicycle
lanes and bicycle ways on street sections with reduced traffic speeds.
4. Arterial Streets. Arterial streets are the primary routes for travel between Hillsboro and
other areas in the region, between major areas of urban activity, and to access the
highway system. Arterial streets vary in width from 2 lanes to 7 lanes: Arterial street
widths are shown in the Design and Construction Standards.
a. If additional left and/or right turn lanes are required as a result of the Traffic Impact
Analysis pursuant to Section 12.70.220, additional right-of-way shall be required as
a condition of development approval.
b. On certain streets in plan districts as specified in Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67,
sidewalks shall be constructed to increased widths, such as 8 feet, 12 feet, or wider.
If approved by the City Engineer, additional right-of-way or sidewalk easements
shall be required on these streets to accommodate the additional sidewalk width.
c. Property access points to arterial streets between intersections are subject to
approval by the Road Authority, and may be conditioned to limitations such as right
turn only configuration, consolidation among adjacent properties, and minimum
spacing standards to reduce traffic conflicts on the arterial street.
5. Collector Streets. Collector streets provide both circulation within and access to residen-
tial and commercial/industrial areas. Although some collector streets may carry the same
traffic levels as arterial streets, collectors may differ functionally from arterials in several
respects: entering residential neighborhoods; distributing trips from neighborhood routes
and local streets; providing a portion of City-wide circulation; and not having access
controls as strict as those for arterials.
a. Certain collector streets identified in the TSP shall be constructed to a larger
capacity.
b. Left turn lanes in collector streets shall be constructed at major intersections and
may be required if approved by the City Engineer at authorized property access
points between intersections.
6. Neighborhood Routes. Neighborhood routes provide connectivity between local streets
and collectors or arterials, and are generally longer and carry more traffic than local
residential streets. To retain neighborhood character and livability, the Review Authority
 12.50.530DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:93Supp. No. 1
may condition development approvals on neighborhood routes to require any of the
following neighborhood traffic management measures, as described in the Transporta-
tion System Plan:
a. Speed humps;
b. On-street parking;
c. Traffic circles;
d. Medians;
e. Landscaping;
f. Curb extensions (bulb-outs);
g. Narrower streets; and/or
h. Chokers (which narrow roadways at selected locations).
7. Local Roads. Local roads serve abutting land only. Right-of-way and improvement
requirements vary with projected vehicles per day (VPD) as specified in the D & C
Standards.
a. Local roads should carry less than 1,500 vehicles per day. If projected VPD is more
than 1,500 vehicles, the Review Authority may require use of neighborhood traffic
management measures as listed in paragraph 6, above, on the street.
b. Narrower local street rights-of-way may be permitted with City Engineer approval if
minimum dimensional requirements are met for travel lanes, bike lanes, parking
lanes and sidewalk widths.
c. To improve public safety, reduce traffic hazards and promote safety for residents,
pedestrians, and bicyclists, and upon recommendation by the City Engineer, the
Review Authority may require that local streets be constructed to discourage use by
non-local automobile traffic.
8. Cul-de-Sac Streets. These streets shall serve not more than 25 dwelling units and should
not be longer than 200 feet except as specified under subparagraph a, below.
a. With City Engineer approval, a cul-de-sac street may exceed 200 feet in length
where the barriers listed in Subsection 12.50.520.C.4. prevent street extension
outside the site. However, if the City Engineer finds there is potential for future
connectivity to adjacent vacant property, design and construction of the develop-
ment and the cul-de-sac shall meet the following standards:
i. The lotting pattern in the development shall be designed to not preclude future
extension of the street;
ii. Street improvements for the cul-de-sac shall not include a permanent turning
area; and
iii. Public right-of-way shall be dedicated from the current cul-de-sac terminus to
the edge of the development to allow future extension of the street.
12.50.530 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:94Supp. No. 1
b. Pursuant to Subsection 12.50.520.B.2, an applicant for a development including
cul-de-sac streets shall make a good faith effort to construct pedestrian and bicycle
accessway connections to neighboring properties from the end of the cul-de-sacs.
c. If construction of the accessways in subparagraph b above is not technically or
economically feasible at the time of land use approval, the Review Authority may
require any or all of the following as a condition of the development approval if the
City Engineer finds that a pedestrian-bicycle connection may be feasible in the
future:
i. Lotting patterns and siting of buildings which do not preclude possible future
connectivity;
ii. Provision of a public easement compliant with Subsection 12.50.430.D. or
12.50.430.E. as applicable, from the cul-de-sac to the property line of the
adjacent lot; and/or
iii. Construction or payment of fee in lieu for the segment of the connection within
the development.
9. Commercial and Industrial Streets. Commercial and industrial streets are intended to
serve primarily abutting non-residential land uses and are not through routes. Due to the
nature of the adjacent land uses, traffic will include larger trucks requiring wider travel
lanes and additional turning radii.
10. Mixed-Use Streets. Mixed-use streets are located within or adjacent to neighborhoods
designated and/or zoned mixed-use on the Comprehensive Plan and Zoning Map.
Mixed-use streets may be local residential or neighborhood streets, collectors, or arterial
streets within or adjacent to these neighborhoods. Mixed-use developments may be
subject to additional base zone standards as listed in Subchapter 12.24, including
variations to the street standards listed in the TSP. Where special plan district street
standards are included in Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67, those standards supersede
both the TSP and the D & C Standards regarding street design and structural cross-
sections.
a. To encourage pedestrian activity and access and increased density of development
in mixed-use neighborhoods, the Review Authority may modify mixed-use street
sections to provide on-street parking, increase sidewalk width, reduce travel lane
width, and/or add bicycle lanes or bicycle ways.
b. Modified mixed-use street configurations may be conditioned by the Review Au-
thority to encourage reduced traffic speeds.
11. Public Alleys. Alleys serve abutting properties only, and are intended primarily as
secondary access for parking and service uses.
a. Development projects within the plan districts listed in Subchapters 12.60 through
12.67 shall improve existing adjacent existing alleys or dedicate and improve new
alleys as required by the plan district standards.
 12.50.530DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:95Supp. No. 1
b. Public alleys may be approved in development projects outside plan districts.
Where approved, the maximum service area and length shall meet D & C Stan-
dards.
C. Street Classifications and Improvements in Light Rail Zones. New streets shall be designed to
accommodate traffic volumes and characteristics of the surrounding land uses, including
demand for on-street parking. Street cross-sections and right-of-way widths in light rail zones
may be varied from the D & C Standards with City Engineer approval if the specifications in
paragraphs 1 and 2 below are met.
1. Local and Neighborhood Route Street Standards. Local and Neighborhood Route streets
shall be improved to the specifications in Table 12.50.530-1:
  Table 12.50.530-1:
Local and Neighborhood Route Street Specifications in Light Rail Zones
Street Design Component Specification
Minimum Lane Width 10 feet
Maximum Lane Width 12 feet
Curb Return Radius 15 feet
Minimum 2-Lane Intersection Throat 24 feet
Minimum 3-Lane Intersection Throat 34 feet
Parking Lane or On-Street Bay Minimum Width 7 feet (see paragraph c below)
Minimum Curbside Landscape Strip 4 feet
Minimum Sidewalk Width 5 feet (see paragraph a below)
Bicycle Lane Width 6 feet (see paragraph b below)
Minimum Alley Improvement Width 16 feet surfaced travel lane within
a 20-foot ROW
a. Bicycle Lanes. Bicycle lanes are required on both sides of a neighborhood route
street, but are not required on local streets.
b. On-street Parking. On-street parking is required on at least 1 side of a street
adjacent to residential development unless additional visitor parking is provided
within the development. If on-street parking is not provided, the street adjacent to
the site shall be signed to prohibit parking.
2. Collector and Arterial Streets Standards. Collector and arterial streets shall be improved
to the specifications shown in Table 12.50.130-1, with the following exceptions:
a. Collector streets shall have a 3-lane section: 2 travel lanes at least 10 feet wide and
a center median or left turn lane at least 11 feet wide. The length of the left turn lane
shall be based on the recommendation of a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) pursuant
to Section 12.70.220, and shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
b. Collector and arterial streets designated or planned as transit streets shall have
wider curbside lanes: at least 12 feet wide. The widths of other transit street
12.50.530 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:96Supp. No. 1
components within the right-of-way shall not be reduced to compensate for this
increased width, and the Review Authority may require additional right-of-way to
accommodate the increased width.
c. Collector and arterial streets shall have on-street bicycle lanes in both travel
directions.
d. The Review Authority may require traffic calming measures on any street within a
light rail zone, consistent with Subsection 12.50.530.B.6, and the recommendations
of the TIA.
e. Arterial street components shall be sized and constructed in compliance with the D
& C Standards and the TIA. If the Standards and the TIA conflict with specific
provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall prevail.
f. Collector and arterial street intersections controlled by traffic signals shall provide
additional sidewalk area at the intersection sufficient to meet AASHTO Urban Street
Pedestrian Queuing Area Level of Service "D" (7 square feet/person). If the street is
3 or more lanes, a center median pedestrian refuge area shall be included in the
street design and improvement, sufficient to meet AASHTO Urban Street Pedes-
trian Queuing Area Level of Service "C" (10 square feet/person). Queuing area size
shall be determined based on estimated pedestrian traffic from the TIA.
3. Street Lighting and Furniture. Except as provided under paragraph 5 below, street
lighting and furniture installed in the public right-of-way within 1,300 feet of an HCT station
shall be either the same as those installed under the original light rail transit project; or as
approved by the Review Authority. Street lighting and furniture subject to this standard
include the following:
a. Streetlight poles and fixtures
b. Bicycle racks
c. Benches
d. Street tree grates
e. Trash receptacles
f. Street and sidewalk surface patterns and materials
g. Street signage
4. Additional Lighting on Arterial and Collector Streets. The City Engineer may require street
lighting on arterial and collector streets to have higher illumination or different poles and
fixtures. The City Engineer may require ornamental street lighting to be supplemented by
the minimum necessary number of standard luminaires mounted on poles matching as
closely as practicable the ornamental streetlight poles.
5. Pedestrian Use Street Design in Light Rail Zones. In light rail residential zones and in the
SCC-SC zone, streets extending from light rail stations should be designed to allow use
by pedestrian-friendly retail and service uses, recreation and social activities.
 12.50.530DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:97Supp. No. 1
D. Street Improvements in Mixed-Use Zones. In addition to the standards in subsections A and B,
above, developments in mixed-use zones adjacent to public streets shall install the following
improvements:
1. Ornamental street lights (as identified in the D & C Standards) with any required public
street improvement; and
2. Curb extensions (bulb-outs) at public street intersections with any required public street
improvement. The design of the bulb-outs shall be subject to approval by the Director and
City Engineer.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6258 § 1, 2018; Ord. 6110 § 7, 2015; Ord. No. 6508,
§ 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-2025)
12.50.540  Private Streets: Design and Improvement.
A. Applicability. These standards apply to all land divisions and development projects which
include or will be required to provide private streets.
B. Specifications and Standards.
1. Use of Private Streets Restricted. The City's preferred standard for access is a public
street. Private through streets are not permitted under all circumstances. Private cul-de-
sac streets may be approved only under the limited circumstances listed below:
a. Where barriers to connectivity, as listed in Subsection 12.50.520.B.4, prevent
construction of public through streets; and
b. Where construction of a non-standard street cross-section (not consistent with the
Public Works Design and Construction Standards) has been approved by the City
Engineer; and
c. Where both permanent ownership and maintenance of the private street tract for a
minimum of 40 years have been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer and the City Attorney.
2. Private Cul-de-Sac Street Standards. If permitted, private cul-de-sac streets shall be
constructed to the reduced width cul-de-sac standards in the Public Works Design and
Construction Standards.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6120 § 1, 2015)
12.50.550  Sidewalk Widths: Design and Location.
A. Applicability. These standards apply to all Type II and III development projects and land
divisions adjacent to public and private streets, which include or will be required to provide
sidewalks.
12.50.530 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:98Supp. No. 1
B. General Sidewalk Standards.
1. The Review Authority shall condition approvals of land use applications adjacent to
existing public streets, and/or required to provide new public or Private streets, to provide
sidewalks consistent with the TSP and the D & C Standards, unless modified or
alternative improvements are approved by the Review Authority or are specified in the
plan districts listed in Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67.
2. Sidewalks are required on both sides of public streets and both sides of private streets
longer than 100 feet. The Review Authority may reduce sidewalk requirements on a
public or private street to 1 side of the frontage to reduce impacts in Significant Natural
Resource Areas or Habitat Benefit Areas or where physical or topographic features
encourage reduced width street improvements.
3. Except as provided in subsection C below, sidewalk widths, design and location on public
streets shall comply with the D & C Standards sidewalk widths. Sidewalk locations on
private streets shall comply with Table 12.50.540-2.
4. Sidewalks on public and private streets shall be constructed to the D & C specifications.
5. Clear sidewalk widths shall not be reduced below 5 feet to accommodate sidewalk
obstacles. If such an obstacle could reduce the clear sidewalk width to less than 5 feet,
the obstacle shall be placed either in the landscape strip or on the property behind the
back edge of the sidewalk, or the sidewalk shall be widened to maintain the minimum
5-foot clear width. As used in this section, sidewalk obstacles may include any of the
following or similar objects:
a. Pedestrian benches;
b. Trash or recycling receptacles;
c. Street light poles;
d. Fire hydrants;
e. Traffic signals;
f. Parking meters;
g. Telephone booths;
h. Newspaper boxes;
i. Public utility vaults;
j. Mailboxes;
k. Vending stands or carts;
l. Temporary signs.
 12.50.550DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:99
6. In light rail zones, if existing public right-of-way cannot accommodate required sidewalks
and landscape strips, additional right-of-way dedications or easements shall be provided
to the City prior to the issuance of building permits for the subject development, except as
provided under paragraph 7 below.
7. In light rail zones, where the façade of an existing building is less than 13 feet from the
curb face, and a proposed redevelopment or remodeling would not move the façade from
its current position, the dedication or easement required under paragraph 5, above, may
be reduced upon approval by the City Engineer and the Building Official to the minimum
width permitted under the Building Code.
C. Alternative Sidewalk Standards.
1. Alternative sidewalk widths, design and location standards in certain plan districts are
specified in Subchapters 12.60 through 12.67, with alternative sidewalk width, design
and location standards include the following:
a. Downtown;
b. Fair Complex/Hawthorn Farm;
c. Orenco;
d. Amberglen;
e. South Hillsboro; and
f. Witch Hazel Village.
2. New development on NE John Olsen Ave. and NE Quatama St. shall construct 8-foot
sidewalks, with at least 4-foot planter strips along the street frontages as shown on Figure
12.50.550-A. Sidewalks on streets not shown on Figure 12.50.550-A shall meet the width
requirements of the Public Works Design and Construction Standards.
3. The Review Authority may approve alternative sidewalk elements under a PUD applica-
tion process pursuant to Section 12.80.120. Alternative sidewalk elements shall also be
subject to approval by the City Engineer.
12.50.550 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:100
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6110 § 7, 2015)
12.50.560  Street Trees.
A. Applicability. These standards apply to all Type II and III development applications and land
divisions adjacent to public streets for which street and/or sidewalk improvements have been
required under Section 12.50.550.
B. Standards. The following standards apply to street tree selection, installation and maintenance
unless alternative standards are specified in Subchapter 12.60.
1. The Review Authority shall condition land use approvals, including requirements for
street and/or sidewalk improvements in public rights-of-way, to select, install and main-
tain street trees and irrigation systems in compliance with the D & C Standards.
 Figure 12.50.550-A:
Sidewalk Requirements for Quatama St/John Olsen Ave
 12.50.560DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:101
2. As required by the D & C Standards, approval of land use applications including street
tree installation shall be conditioned to require provision of acceptable financial assur-
ances to ensure compliance with the applicable standards.
3. Following the 2-year establishment period, maintenance, pruning, and if necessary
removal and replacement of street trees shall comply with the provisions of the D & C
Standards.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022)
12.50.560 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:102
12.50.600  Public Utilities, Site Grading and Storm Water Management Facilities Site Integra-
tion.
Public utilities general requirements, site grading, and storm water facilities site integration stan-
dards include the following sections:
12.50.610 Purpose, Applicability and Exceptions
12.50.620 Public Utilities General Requirements
12.50.625 Power and Communications Utility Undergrounding
12.50.630 Site Grading
12.50.640 Storm Water Facilities Site Integration
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022)
12.50.610  Purpose, Applicability and Exceptions.
A. Purpose. Comprehensive Plan Section 15 Public Facilities and Services requires that devel-
opment is appropriately guided and supported by the provision of public facilities and services
in a timely, orderly and efficient manner. These standards set out a framework to assure that
proposed development provides for the design, construction and maintenance of the neces-
sary public facilities.
B. Applicability. Except as may be specified otherwise in this section, these standards apply to all
development projects requiring installation of public utilities on site, adjacent, or off site to the
project.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6261 § 1, 2018; Ord. 6250 § 1, 2017)
12.50.620  Public Utilities General Requirements.
A. General Standards.
1. Adequate Utilities Required. The Review Authority shall condition a land use application
approval to require provision of public water, sanitary sewer, communications, and storm
drainage service adequate to serve the approved level of development in a manner that
is consistent with Section 12.50.620.A.2. It is the applicant's burden of proof to demon-
strate that adequate facilities and services are presently available or will be made
available concurrent with development. The Review Authority may condition a develop-
ment approval to extend, modify or replace an existing off-site public water, sanitary
sewer, communications, or storm drainage facility or system to provide adequate public
facilities or services in a manner that is consistent with Section 12.50.620.A.2. to the
development site.
2. Compliance with Other Standards. Construction of all public water, sanitary sewer,
communications, and storm drainage facilities and services shall comply with the D & C
Standards, CWS standards or TVWD standards as applicable.
 12.50.620DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:103
3. Service Provider Letters Presumed Correct. Service providers shall be presumed correct
in the evidence which they submit relating to the adequacy and availability of facilities and
services to the development.
B. Public Utility Easements.
1. A land division approved under Section 12.80.090 shall be conditioned to require public
utility easements (PUEs) for private utilities as approved by the City Engineer, consistent
with the D & C Standards.
2. The Review Authority may condition approval of any Type I, Type II or Type III land use
application, Zoning Review applications, and ELD Preliminary Plat applications to pro-
vide PUEs as approved by the City Engineer, consistent with the D & C Standards.
3. PUEs required under paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall be provided to and accepted by the
City upon recording of a final plat or prior to occupancy if a final plat is not required. A
required easement width specified in the D & C Standards may be reduced only with
approval of the City Engineer, Building and Water Departments, and all affected utilities.
C. Undergrounding Public Utilities.
1. Except as specified in Section 12.50.625, all public utility distribution and service
connections shall be underground.
D. Maintaining Angle of Repose.
1. Preliminary applications for developments proposing front setbacks less than 10 feet
shall include utility plans showing horizontal and vertical locations of public and private
utilities to demonstrate adequate angles of repose.
2. To assure that structural footprints are sited to provide adequate area for installation and
maintenance of public and private utilities in compliance with City standards, the Review
Authority may condition land use approvals to require additional setbacks or easement
widths to assure adequate separation of utilities before and after construction.
3. Where additional setbacks or easements cannot be provided or acquired without signif-
icantly affecting the project design or reducing the buildable area, the Building Official
may allow modifications to a structural foundation footing to reduce the angle of repose
influence on an adjacent public utility easement.
E. Utility Equipment in Urban Areas.
1. Location. Utility equipment in the following zones shall be located either within an
underground vault or shall be screened and spaced as required by Subsections E.2 and
E.3:
a. SCC-DT Station Community Commercial — Downtown.
b. Within the Orenco Town Center Plan District: SCC-SC Station Community Com-
mercial — Station Commercial and SCR-V Station Community Residential —
Village.
12.50.620 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:104
c. All zones within the Amberglen Plan District.
d. All zones within the Tanasbourne Town Center Plan.
e. Within the South Hillsboro Plan District: along Active Use Streets 1 and 2 in the
MU-VTC Mixed Use — Village Town Center.
2. Spacing. Above ground utility equipment shall be located away from any paved surfaces
including public and private streets, driveways, and walkways to allow a minimum of 10
feet of clearance between the paved surface and the utility equipment in such a way that
safety and system reliability is not compromised.
3. Screening. One or more of the following methods of screening shall be required for above
ground utility equipment:
a. Low walls that are a minimum of 6 inches taller than the vents, access doors, or
utility equipment to be screened, and which are architecturally treated to match the
other on-site walls and covered with vines with a minimum size of 5 gallons, spaced
10 feet on center or as otherwise approved by the Review Authority. Walls shall
comply with all applicable zoning requirements.
b. Landscaping that, upon installation, shall screen a minimum of 75% of the vents,
access doors, or utility equipment from view.
c. Artificial "rock" equipment that covers 100% of the utility equipment. These should
be accented with natural boulders and landscaping.
d. Locating the utility equipment within a building, as permitted by regulations.
e. Locating the utility equipment in an alley or on the rear of the project.
f. Any other screening option that may be available due to unique site or building
design characteristics and that complies with Section 12.50.620.A.2.
(Ord. 6437 § 1, 2023; Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6261 § 1, 2018; Ord. No. 6508,
§ 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-2025)
12.50.625  Power and Communications Utility Undergrounding.
A. Purpose. To require the undergrounding of all above ground electric power lines and commu-
nication lines along the site's frontage, and to include service connections to on-site develop-
ment, in order to improve public safety, the reliability of service during and after storms, and
streetscape aesthetics.
B. Applicability.
1. The standards in this Section 12.60.625 apply to new and existing utility lines that operate
below 35,000 volts.
2. Exemptions. Applicants are not required to underground existing electric power lines and
other co-located communication lines or pay fee-in-lieu (FIL) of undergrounding these
utilities in the following situations:
a. The site is already fully in compliance with the requirements of this Section
12.50.625;
 12.50.625DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:105Supp. No. 1
b. The project is the result of damages caused by natural disaster (e.g., earthquake,
flood, etc.) which is outside the influence of the property owner and/or applicant;
c. The application is for one of the following:
i. Minor partition in a middle housing zone (per Table 12.01.200-1),
ii. Single detached dwelling, accessory dwelling unit, or middle housing devel-
opment,
iii. Type I review,
iv. Expansion of existing multi-dwelling residential, commercial or mixed use
buildings which increase existing floor area by less than 10% or 5,000 square
feet, whichever is less. Cumulative expansions that increase floor area over
10% are not exempt,
v. Expansion of existing industrial buildings which increase existing floor area by
less than 15% or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. Cumulative expansions
that increase floor area over 15% are not exempt.
3. Type A Projects. Type A projects are projects that are not exempt, but which meet one of
the criteria below. Type A projects are subject to the standards of Subsection C.
a. The site has less than 100 feet of street frontage with existing above ground electric
power lines that is subject to the undergrounding requirement;
b. Undergrounding the existing above ground electric power lines would not result in a
decrease in the number of electric utility poles. The change in the number of utility
poles shall be based on an estimate provided by the electric power franchise.
4. Type B Projects. Except for capital improvement projects which are subject to the City of
Hillsboro's Capital Improvement Plan and Type A projects which are subject to the
standards of Subsection C, all other projects are considered Type B projects and are
subject to the standards in Subsection D.
C. Standards Applicable to Type A Projects.
1. All above ground electric power lines and co-located communication lines along the site's
frontage and related service connections to on-site development shall be installed
underground unless the applicant opts to pay a FIL in accordance with Paragraph C.3 or
D.2.
2. Electric power lines and co-located communication lines to be installed underground are
subject to the installation standards in Subsection E.
12.50.625 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:106Supp. No. 1
3. Applicants for Type A projects may opt to make a partial payment of the required FIL using
the percent of project valuation methodology in this section or pay the full FIL using the
methodology in Subsection D.2.
 Project Type Amount of FIL
Subdivisions 10% of the project valuation
Projects other than subdivisions 5% of the project valuation
a. Project valuation shall be determined utilizing valuation tables or through use of an
estimate provided by the architect, engineer, or contractor for the project, whichever
is higher.
b. For subdivisions, the FIL shall be paid to the City prior to approval of a final plat. For
other projects, the FIL shall be paid to the City prior to the issuance of the first
building permit for the project.
c. The fees shall be deposited in a fund to be used only for undergrounding of utilities
in the City and purposes directly related thereto.
d. If the project valuation estimate is less than the linear foot estimate in Subsection
D.2, additional FIL payments up to the full amount required by Subsection D.2 shall
be required at the time when the site further develops or redevelops.
D. Standards Applicable to Type B Projects.
1. Except where an Adjustment has been approved pursuant to Section 12.80.154 or
Section 12.80.156, all above ground electric power lines and co-located communication
lines along the site's frontage and related service connections to on-site development
shall be placed underground.
2. If an Adjustment is approved, the applicant shall pay a FIL of undergrounding the utilities.
a. The FIL shall be based on the City's approved fee schedule.
b. If a partial fee has already been paid on a site, the fee is reduced by the amount that
has previously been paid. If 100% of the fee has been paid on a site, no further fees
are due.
c. For subdivisions, the FIL shall be paid to the City prior to approval of a final plat. For
other projects, the FIL shall be paid to the City prior to the issuance of the first
building permit for the project.
d. The fees shall be deposited in a fund to be used only for undergrounding of utilities
in the City and purposes directly related thereto.
 12.50.625DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:107Supp. No. 1
E. Installation Standards for the Undergrounding Electric Power Lines and Other Co-Located
Communication Lines.
1. Electric power lines and co-located communication lines shall be undergrounded in the
locations listed in Table 12.50.625-1, subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
2. As an alternative to the locations listed in Table 12.50.625-1, the Review Authority may
require utilities to be placed underground within an adjacent alley right-of-way if such
right-of-way is available, with vault locations as approved by the City Engineer and the
utility provider.
  Table 12.50.625-1:
Electric Power Lines and Other Co-Located
Communication Lines Undergrounding Scenarios
Applicable Situation Location for Undergrounding
Applicable minimum zone setback
is 10 feet or greater Located in a PUE with a minimum width of 8 feet
Applicable minimum zone setback
is less than 10 feet
Located in the right-of-way under the sidewalk
with approval of the City Engineer, or in a PUE
(Ord. 6437 § 1, 2023; Ord. No. 6508, § 1 (Exh. A), 11-4-2025)
12.50.630  Site Grading.
A. Purpose. The standards of this section are intended to assure that grading prior to or during site
development, or independently from development, is planned and accomplished to avoid
adverse impacts to adjacent or abutting properties and significant natural resource areas,
maintain pedestrian and bicycle connectivity between properties were applicable, and main-
tain accessibility to public and private utility lines and easements.
B. Applicability.
1. The on-site surface contour grading standards specified in this section are applicable to
all major and minor site alterations as defined in Section 12.01.500 where site fill or
excavation, mass grading or soil stockpiling is proposed.
2. Pursuant to the requirements of Public Works Design and Construction Standards
Section 115.3, a site grading plan is required for any development that involves excava-
tion or fill on public or private property or in public right-of-way. Plans for grading proposed
in conjunction with a Type I, Type II or Type III land use application development shall be
submitted with the land use applications pursuant to Subchapter 12.80 Applications.
3. The section does not supersede Section 12.27.100 Regulatory Floodplain Overlay or
Section 12.27.200 Significant Natural Resource Overlay: where these standards conflict
with those sections, the requirements of those sections supersede.
12.50.625 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:108Supp. No. 1
C. Exemptions. The following site alterations are exempt from the standards in this section:
1. Public right-of-way road improvements including new streets, street widening, sidewalks,
and similar or related improvements;
2. Public utility improvements including new water, sanitary sewer, or storm drainage lines,
public storm water facilities, and similar or related improvements; and
3. Filling, excavating, and grading on private properties adjacent to public improvements
listed in Paragraphs 1 and/or 2 above, when such alterations are undertaken as part of
and in conjunction with the construction of the improvements.
D. Standards Applicable within and Adjacent to Single Dwelling Residential Zones.
1. Except as provided in subsection F below, when grading a site within 25 feet of a property
line within or abutting any property zoned single dwelling residential (as listed in Section
12.21.010), on-site grading shall be finished to the surface contours shown in Table
12.50.630-1:
  Table 12.50.630-1:
On-Site Grading Grade Differential Requirements in
and Adjacent to Single Dwelling Residential Zones
Distance from Property Line Difference from existing or finished elevation
of abutting property as applicable
0.0 feet to 1.0 feet No grade differential
1.0 feet to 5.0 feet Maximum 2 feet grade differential
5.1 feet to 10.0 feet Maximum 4 feet grade differential
10.1 feet to 15.0 feet Maximum 6 feet grade differential
15.1 feet to 20.0 feet Maximum 8 feet grade differential
Over 20.0 feet Maximum 10 feet grade differential
2. Where an existing grade differential before site alteration exceeds 1 or more of the
standards in Table 12.50.630-1 above, the grade differential after alteration shall not
exceed the original.
3. The on-site grading differential standards in paragraph 1 above apply only to perimeter
property lines of a parent property, and not to internal property lines created by a land
division process under Section 12.80.090.
E. Standards Applicable Adjacent to Significant Natural Resource Areas.
1. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections D and E above, grading within 25 feet
of a Significant Natural Resource (SNR) boundary or Resource Impact Areas (IA)
boundary, whether located on or off site, shall be finished to the following surface
contours:
a. From 0.0 to 10.0 feet from the boundary: no change in pre-development ground
elevation; and
 12.50.630DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS
CDC12.50:109
b. From 10.1 feet to 25.0 feet from the boundary: a maximum 10% slope gradient
difference from the pre-development ground elevation.
2. Based on the recommendation of a Qualified Natural Resources Professional as defined
in Section 12.01.500, the Review Authority may require additional surface contouring or
other grading measures to protect the SNR or IA area from grading or erosion impacts.
F. Land Use Approval Required for Mass Grading or Site Grading Not Associated with Develop-
ment. If mass grading or stockpiling as defined in Section 12.01.500 is proposed on public or
private property, the site grading plan required under D & C Standards Section 120.4 shall be
submitted as a Type II Development Review application pursuant to Section 12.80.040.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6258 § 1, 2018)
12.50.640  Storm Water Facilities Site Integration.
A. Purpose. The standards of this section are intended to assure that aboveground stormwater
facilities are designed and constructed to meet applicable standards in the Public Works
Design and Construction Standards and in Clean Water Services (CWS) Construction Stan-
dards, and that overall landscape design is integrated with such facilities.
B. Applicability. The standards specified in this section are applicable to any project which
includes aboveground stormwater facilities and meets the definition of "development" in CWS
Design and Construction Standards.
C. Exemptions. Activities exempted from the definition of "development" under CWS Design and
Construction Standards are exempt from the provisions of this section.
D. Standards.
1. Plans for aboveground stormwater facilities shall be submitted with landscaping plans for
land use applications under Subchapter 12.80 Applications. Site improvements in the
vicinity of the stormwater facility shall designed and installed to integrate the facility into
the site design through coordination of finished grade elevations and use of compatible
landscaping species consistent with Section 12.50.220.
2. The Review Authority may condition any Type II or Type III land use application approval
to require that the aboveground stormwater facility complies with the applicable provi-
sions of the 2018 CWS Design and Construction Standards Chapter 3 Sensitive Areas
and Vegetated Corridors and Chapter 4 Runoff Treatment and Control.
(Ord. 6401 § 1, 2022; Ord. 6322 § 1, 2019; Ord. 6258 § 1, 2018)
12.50.630 HILLSBORO COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE
CDC12.50:110
