CHAPTER 17.16 - AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES





Sec. 17.16.00. - Intent.


The intent of this section is to provide for those uses not specifically listed in commercial or industrial zoning districts but which are similar in character, scale and performance to permitted uses specified therein. Zoning districts in which a similar use may be authorized are:
Central Business District C-1.

General Commercial C-2.

Village Commercial C-3.

Industrial Park I-1.

Light Industrial I-2.

Heavy Industrial I-3.


Sec. 17.16.10. - Similar use to a listed permitted use.


This is processed as a Type I or Type II procedure as determined by the Director.


Sec. 17.16.20. - Similar use to a listed conditional use.


This is processed as a Type III procedure.


Sec. 17.16.30. - Application materials.


A.

An application for authorization of a similar use shall be filed with the Director and accompanied by the appropriate fee.

B.

Narrative addressing the review criteria.

C.

List of affected property owners.


Sec. 17.16.40. - Review criteria.


A similar use may be authorized provided that the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use satisfies the following criteria:
A.

The use is consistent with the purpose of the underlying zoning district and is similar in character, scale and performance to permitted uses specified in the underlying district.

B.

The use conforms to the applicable standards and limitations of the underlying zoning district.


Sec. 17.16.50. - Conditions of approval.


In approving an application for a similar use, conditions may be imposed as necessary and appropriate to ensure that the intent of this section is carried out.


Sec. 17.16.60. - Compliance with conditions.


Compliance with conditions imposed in approval of a similar use and adherence to an approved plot plan shall be required. Any departure from these conditions of approval and approved plans constitutes a violation of this Code. Approval of any similar use may be revoked for failure to comply with any condition imposed in approval of the similar use or for any other violation of this Code.


Sec. 17.16.70. - Incorporation into the Development Code.


Upon authorization of use, either permitted or conditional, the use shall be incorporated into the Development Code during the next major update of the Code. Until this incorporation occurs, a list of similar uses shall be maintained at the City for use in reviewing development proposals.
