CHAPTER 17.94 - DRIVE-UP USES





Sec. 17.94.00. - Intent.


These provisions are established to ensure safe, functional drive-up uses while not impeding flow of traffic. For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered no less than 20 feet in length.

The width and turning radius of drive-up aisles shall be approved through the Type I design review process.


Sec. 17.94.10. - Applicability.


These regulations govern all drive-up uses in all zoning districts.


Sec. 17.94.20. - Minimum requirements.


A.

Parking maneuvers shall not occur in the stacking area. The stacking area shall not interfere with safe and efficient access to other parking areas on the site or adjacent properties.

B.

Drive-up aisles and windows must be located a minimum of 50 feet from residential zones to avoid adverse impacts.

C.

All restaurant facilities, except short term food service, providing drive-up service shall provide at least two designated parking spaces immediately beyond the service window or provide other satisfactory methods to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to receive service while parked.

D.

The grade of the stacking area to the drive-up shall not exceed a slope of twelve percent.

E.

The drive-up shall be designed to provide as much natural ventilation as possible to eliminate the buildup of exhaust gasses.

F.

The sound level of communications systems shall not exceed 55 decibels at the property line and shall otherwise comply with provisions of the Sandy Municipal Code regarding sound levels.


Sec. 17.94.30. - Stacking distance.


Drive-up window uses shall provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public right-of-way and parking lot aisles from the window serving the vehicles as follows:
A.

Banks. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for five vehicles.

B.

Restaurants. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for eight vehicles.

C.

Short-Term Food Service. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for three vehicles. Short Term Food Service is defined as a facility serving espresso, ice cream, or other single-service product. A maximum of one designated parking space located at the end of the stacking area may be substituted for one required stacking space for small convenience food stops only.

D.

Other Drive-up Uses.

1.

Automotive Fueling Stations. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for four vehicles.

2.

Other Uses. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for two to eight vehicles, as determined through the design review process.
