Chapter 16.24
 DEFINITIONS
Sections:
16.24.010  Meaning of words generally.
16.24.020  Definitions of specific terms.
16.24.030  Definitions of land use types.
16.24.040  Solar access figures.
16.24.010 Meaning of words generally.
A. All of the terms used in this title have their
commonly accepted dictionary meaning unless they
are specifically defined in this chapter or the con-
text in which they are used clearly indicates to the
contrary.
B. All words used in the present tense include
the future tense.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are manda-
tory and the word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 96-4
§ 1 (part), 1996)
16.24.020 Definitions of specific terms.
As used in this title the following words and
phrases shall mean:
"Abut/abutting" means two or more proper-
ties or lots joined by a common boundary or
point.
"Access" means the right to cross between
public and private property allowing pedestrians,
bicyclists, and vehicles to enter and leave property.
"Accessory building or structure" means a
structure incidental and subordinate to the main
use of a property, is located on the same lot as the
main use, and is not a dwelling unit.
"Accessway" means any off-street way, which
is intended for the primary use of pedestrians
and/or bicyclists.
"Adult foster home" means an adult foster
home licensed by or under the authority of the
state (Mental Health and Developmental Services
Division), which provides residential care alone or
in conjunction with treatment or training or a
combination thereof for less than six individuals.
These individuals need not be related. Staff per-
sons needed to meet licensing requirements shall
not be counted in the number of facility residents,
and need not be related to each other or to any
resident of the residential home.
"Appeal" means a request that a final decision
by an approval authority be considered by a higher
authority as described in this title.
"Applicant" means a person who applies for a
land use review or building permit. An applicant
can be the owner of the property or someone who
is representing the owner such as a builder, attor-
ney, developer, optional purchaser, consultant or
architect.
"Approval authority" means either the city
manager, planning commission or city council.
"Bikeway" means any road, path or way open
to bicycle travel regardless of whether such facili-
ties are designed for the preferential use of bicycles
or are to be shared with other transportation modes.
This includes a shared roadway, shoulder bikeway,
bike lane or accessway.
"Building" means any structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls and used for hous-
ing or enclosure of persons, animals, or property
of any kind.
"Building height" means the vertical distance
between the highest point of a structure and the
average grade along the front foundation.
"Caliper" means the thickness or diameter of
a tree measured six inches above the ground or
root ball.
"City" means the city of King City, Oregon.
"City council or council" means the city coun-
cil for the City of King City, Oregon.
"City manager or manager" means the admin-
istrative head of the city or such other city em-
ployee or consultant who may from time to time
be designated by the city manager to perform the
functions delegated to the city manager.
"Co-location" means the placement of two or
more wireless communication antenna systems or
platforms by separate FCC license holders on any
structure including a building, water tank, or wire-
less communication structure.
16.24.010
174.6(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
"Complete application" means the submittal
of materials by an applicant in support of a land
use application which contains all of the necessary
information required by this title. If the total sub-
mittal is determined to be incomplete by the city
manager, and the applicant chooses to rely only on
the material submitted, the application shall be
considered to be complete thirty days after the
applicant is informed that the application is defi-
cient.
"Comprehensive plan" means the current King
City Comprehensive Plan.
"Cutting" means falling or removal of a tree,
or any procedure the natural resort of which is to
cause the death or substantial destruction of a
tree. Cutting does not include normal trimming,
pruning or topping of trees.
"De novo" means beginning a new hearing
with no reliance on the record of previous deci-
sions or hearings.
"Density" means the intensity of residential
land use expressed as the number of dwelling units
per gross acre.
"Development" means any short plat, parti-
tion, subdivision or planned unit development that
is created under the city's land division or zoning
regulations. It also refers to any man-made change
to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, construction, installation or
change of a building or other structure, change in
use of building or structure, land division, estab-
lishment, or termination of right of access, stor-
age on the land, tree cutting, drilling, and site
alteration such as that due to land surface improve-
ments for use as parking, excavation or clearing.
"Discretionary" means the freedom to make
choices using criteria that may be interpreted in a
variety of ways depending upon the circumstances
of the land use decision.
"Drainageway" means a normal stream or
drainage channel needed to convey waters of a
twenty-five-year storm.
"Drip line" means the ground within the pe-
rimeter of the foliage of a tree.
"Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing
complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation.
"Easement" means the right to use land in a
limited way for a stated purpose.
"Family" means one or two individuals or two
or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal
adoption or legal guardianship, living together as
one housekeeping unit using one kitchen and pro-
viding meals or lodging to not more than two
additional persons, excluding servants.
Floodplain definitions.
1. "Appeal" means a request for a review of
the interpretation of any provision of Chapter
16.140 or a request for a variance.
2. "Base flood" means the flood having a one
percent change of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
3. "Basement" means any area of the build-
ing having its floor subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
4. "Below-grade crawl space" means an en-
closed area below the base flood elevation in which
the interior grade is not more than two feet below
the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height,
measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace
to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not
exceed four feet at any point.
5. "Conditional letter of map revision
(CLOMR)" means a letter from FEMA comment-
ing on whether a proposed project, if built as
propose, would meet the minimum NFIP stan-
dards or proposed hydrology changes.
6. "Critical facility" means a facility for which
even a slight chance of flooding might be too
great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire
and emergency response installations, installa-
tions which produce, use or store hazardous ma-
terials or hazardous waste.
7. "Development" means any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, pav-
 16.24.020
174.7 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
ing, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials located within the special
flood hazard area.
8. "Drainage hazard area" Those areas sub-
ject to flooding as the result of a twenty-five year
storm.
9. "Elevated building" means, for insurance
purposes, a nonbasement building which has its
lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by
foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings,
or columns.
10. "Existing manufactured home park or sub-
division" means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the adopted floodplain management reg-
ulations.
11. "Expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision" means the preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
12. "Flood" or "flooding" means:
a. A general and temporary condition of par-
tial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
i. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
ii. The unusual and rapid accumulation of
runoff of surface waters from any source.
ii. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows which are prox-
imately caused by flooding as defined in subsec-
tion 1.b. of this definition and are akin to a river of
liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of nor-
mally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a
current of water and deposited along the path of
the current.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along
the shore of a lake or other body of water as a
result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompa-
nied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal
tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and un-
foreseeable event which results in flooding as de-
fined in Subsection 1.a. of this definition.
13. "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)"
means an official map on which the Federal Insur-
ance Administrator has delineated both the spe-
cial hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a Digital
Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
14. "Flood insurance study" means the offi-
cial report provided by the Federal Insurance Ad-
ministration that is an examination, evaluation,
and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
15. "Floodway" means the channel of a river
or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot.
16. "Letter of map change (LOMC)" means
an official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps
and/or flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued
in the following categories:
a. Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). An
amendment to the flood insurance rate maps based
on technical data showing that an existing struc-
ture or parcel of land that has not been elevated by
fill (natural grade) was inadvertently included in
the special flood hazard area because of an area of
naturally high ground above the base flood.
b. Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
LOMR-F (Letter of Map Revision based on Fill)
is a letter from FEMA stating that an existing
structure or parcel of land that has been elevated
by fill would not be inundated by the base flood.
17. A LOMR revises the current flood insur-
ance rate map and/or flood insurance study to
show changes to the floodplains, floodways or
16.24.020
174.8(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
flood elevations. LOMRs are generally based on
manmade alterations that affected the hydrologic
or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source
and thus result in modification to the existing
regulatory floodway, the effective base flood ele-
vation, or the special flood hazard area. It is rec-
ommended a conditional letter of map revision be
approved by FEMA prior to issuing a permit to
start a project if the project has a potential to
affect the special flood hazard area. (see condi-
tional letter of map revision)
18. "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of
the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage,
in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable non-eleva-
tion design requirements of this chapter found at
Section 16.140.070.B.5 of this chapter.
19. "Manufactured home" means a structure,
transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term "man-
ufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
20. "Manufactured home park or subdivi-
sion" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
21. "New construction" means structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain manage-
ment regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
22. "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle
which is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. Four hundred square feet or less when mea-
sured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or perma-
nently towable by a light-duty truck; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a perma-
nent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
23. "Special flood hazard area" means the
land in the floodplain with a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. It is also
referred to as the one hundred-year floodplain.
This area is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) with the letter designation "AE" in
the King City area.
24. "Start of construction" includes substan-
tial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilita-
tion, additional placement or other improvement
was within one hundred eighty days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first place-
ment of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a founda-
tion. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it in-
clude the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a build-
ing, whether or not that alteration affects the ex-
ternal dimensions of the building.
25. "Structure" means a walled and roofed
building, a modular or temporary building, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground.
26. "Substantial damage" means damage of
any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before dam-
aged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent
of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
 16.24.020
174.9 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
27. "Substantial improvement" means any re-
construction, rehabilitation, addition, or other im-
provement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the
structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does
not include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a struc-
ture to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a "historic structure",
provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's designation as a "historic structure."
28. "Variance" as applied in Chapter 16.140
means a grant of relief from the requirements of
Chapter 16.140 which permits construction in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
Chapter 16.140.
29. "Water dependent" means a structure for
commerce or industry which cannot exist in any
other location and is dependent on the water by
reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations.
"Floor area ratio (FAR)" means the amount
of building floor area in relation to the amount of
site area, expressed in square feet. For example, a
floor area ratio of two to one means there is two
square feet of floor area for every one square foot
of site area. Public utility easements may be ex-
cluded from the site area when calculating the
FAR.
"Frontage length" means the length of a prop-
erty frontage along a street right-of-way. In the
case of corner lots, the right-of-way of the inter-
secting street or streets shall not be included in
measuring this distance.
"Greenways" means any off-street way, which
is intended for travel use by pedestrian and bicy-
clists, but also intended for recreational use.
Greenways may include linear parks, open space
corridors or multi-purpose corridors, as long as
they are particularly intended for travel use by
pedestrians and bicyclists.
"Impervious surface" means pavement, main-
tained gravel areas, structures, public and private
roadways, sidewalks, roofs, and other hard sur-
faces which are not specifically designed to allow
water to infiltrate.
"Landscaped open space" means lot area ex-
clusive of building, roofed areas, parking and drive-
ways, planted and maintained in grass, shrubbery
or trees.
"Landform alteration" means any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the addition of build-
ings or other structures, mining, quarrying, dredg-
ing, filling, grading, earthwork, construction, stock-
piling of rock, sand, dirt or gravel or other earth
material, paving, excavation or drilling operations
located within a sensitive land area.
"Legislative" refers to an amendment to this
title or the comprehensive plan or a land use deci-
sion that applies to a large number of individuals
or properties.
"Live-work unit" means a dwelling unit where
residential and nonresidential spaces are com-
bined and where the dwelling unit is the principal
residence of the business operator/proprietor. Non-
residential spaces are typically located on the
ground floor with separate access and residential
spaces are located on upper floors or the rear of
the building.
"Loading area" means the area available for
the maneuvering and short-term parking of vehi-
cles engaged in delivering and loading of passen-
gers, freight or other articles.
"Lot" means a parcel or tract of land.
"Lot area" means the total horizontal area
within the lot lines of a lot exclusive of streets and
easements of access to other property.
"Lot, corner" means a lot that is located at the
intersection of two or more public street rights-of-
way.
16.24.020
174.10(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
"Lot coverage" means the percentage of a lot
that may be covered by impervious surface includ-
ing buildings, driveways, sidewalks and parking
areas.
"Lot depth, average" means the depth of the
lot measured from the midpoint of the opposing
side lot lines.
"Lot, interior" means a lot that has street front-
age on only one side.
"Lot line" means the legal boundary of a par-
cel, tract of land or lot.
1. A "front lot line" is a lot line that abuts a
street.
2. A "rear lot line" is a lot line that is opposite
from the front lot line. In the case of more than
one front lot line, the rear lot line shall only corre-
spond with one of the front lot lines. If a lot has
street frontage on opposing sides, the rear lot line
shall correspond with the street frontage where
vehicular access is not allowed or provided.
3. "Side lot lines" are the remaining property
boundaries that are neither front or rear lot lines.
"Lot line adjustment" means a modification to
the common boundaries of two or more parcels or
tracts of land which does not result in the creation
of any additional parcels or tracts of land.
"Lot width, average" means the width of the
lot measured from the midpoint of the front and
rear lot lines.
"Mixed solid waste" means solid waste that
contains recoverable or recyclable materials, and
materials that are not capable of being recycled or
recovered for further use.
"Monument" means a fixed, permanent and
visible landmark indicating property boundaries.
"Nonconforming use or structure" means a
lawfully existing use or structure that was ap-
proved or established prior to an amendment to
this title for which it does not comply.
"Non-residential building" means a structure
that is used for any non-residential function, in-
cluding, but not limited to, office, retail, educa-
tional and institutional uses.
"Off-site" means all lands or facilities which
are within the analysis area but is not on-site.
"On-site" means all lands in the development
application and one-half the right-of-way (to
centerline) of roads lying adjacent to such lands.
"Owner" means the owner of record of real
property as shown on the latest tax rolls of Wash-
ington County, or by the deed records of said
county, or a person who is purchasing a parcel of
property under contract.
"Parking space" means a space designed to
provide for the short-term or long-term storage of
motor vehicles.
"Partition" means a division of a parcel or
tract of land into two or three lots within a calen-
dar year.
"Partition" does not include:
1. A division of land resulting from a lien
foreclosure, foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded
contract for the sale of real property or the cre-
ation of cemetery lots;
2. An adjustment of a property line by the
relocation of a common boundary where an addi-
tional lot is not created and where the existing unit
of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies
with all applicable ordinance provisions; or
3. A sale or grant by a person to a public
agency or public body for state highway, county
road, city street or other right-of-way purposes.
"Patio cover" means a one-story structure
erected above a patio which does not exceed twelve
feet in height.
"Patio enclosure" means a patio having a cover
and one to three walls built in compliance with
Section 4901 of the uniform building code. Enclo-
sure walls may have any configuration, provided
the open area of the longer wall and one addi-
tional wall is equal to at least sixty-five percent of
the area below a minimum of six feet eight inches
of each wall, measured from the floor. Openings
may be enclosed with insect screening or plastic
that is readily removable translucent or transpar-
ent plastic not more than 0.125 inches in thickness.
"Pedestrian oriented uses" means those land
uses which by their nature or neighborhood orien-
tation attract a greater than average level of pedes-
trian use. Pedestrian oriented uses include but are
 16.24.020
174.11 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
not limited to schools, parks, transit stops, recre-
ation centers and neighborhood commercial cen-
ters.
"Person" means an individual, firm, partner-
ship, corporation, company, associations, syndi-
cate or any legal entity, and including any trustee,
receiver, assignee or other similar representative
thereof.
"Planning commission" or "commission" means
the planning commission of King City, Oregon.
"Plat" includes a final subdivision plat or replat
containing all the descriptions, locations, dedica-
tions, specifications, provisions and information
concerning a subdivision, suitable for filing under
the regulations of this title and state law.
"Principal street" means the street adjacent to
a property with the highest transportation hierar-
chy classification. Other abutting streets, if any,
are deemed to be secondary streets. Determina-
tion of the principal street shall be done using the
following priority:
• Arterial street;
• Collector street;
• Neighborhood collector street; and
• Local street.
"Quasi-judicial" means a land use action which
involves the application of adopted comprehen-
sive plan policies and the provisions of this title to
a specific land use application, effecting identified
parcels of land or property owners.
"Reserve strip" means a strip of land reserved
between the end or side of a street or alley and on
abutting parcel of land, or a strip of land between
a dedicated street of less than full width and an
abutting parcel of land, held for future street ex-
tension or widening.
"Right-of-way" means the area between bound-
ary lines of a public way.
"Riparian area" means the area adjacent to a
river, lake or stream, which is the area of transi-
tion from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial
ecosystem. For the purposes of this title they shall
include areas within seventy-five feet of the top of
bank for the Tualatin River.
"Road" or "street" means a public or private
way that is created to provide access for persons to
one or more lots, parcels or tracts of land.
"Sensitive lands" means those areas that are
within a drainageway, one hundred-year flood
plain, or wetland as defined in this title.
"Setback" means the shortest horizontal dis-
tance between the wall or foundation of a building
and property line with the exception of garage
setback.
1. "Front setback" is measured from a front
lot line.
2. "Garage setback" is measured from a street
lot line to the entrance to a garage or carport,
following the center of the driveway.
3. "Rear setback" is measured from a rear lot
line.
4. "Side setback" is measured from an inte-
rior side lot line.
5. "Street setback" is measured from a side lot
line which abuts a street.
"Sidewalk" means a concrete way located gen-
erally parallel to a street within the right-of-way
which meets adopted design standards. It is pri-
marily intended for use by pedestrians.
"Sidewalk zones" refers to three different zones
on public sidewalks that include:
• "Clear zone," which is the unobstructed
portion for walking.
• "Street tree and furniture zone," which is
the portion of the sidewalk adjacent to the
curb in which street trees may be planted.
This zone is also intended for the place-
ment of street furniture including seating,
street lights, waste receptacles, fire hy-
drants, traffic signs, newspaper vending
boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks, public
utility equipment, and similar elements in
a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian
access or motorist visibility.
• "Supplemental zone," which lies between
the clear zone and the street-facing build-
ing façade or front yard landscaping. This
16.24.020
174.12(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
zone is intended to public uses including
window shopping, plaza, outdoor cafe, or
patio.
"Sight obscuring" refers to any fence, wall or
vegetation which conceals or makes indistinct any
object viewed through such a fence, wall or vege-
tation. To be sight obscuring, vegetation must be
capable of providing this level of screening within
two years after planting.
Sign Definitions (related to Chapter 16.148):
1. "Abandoned sign" means a sign associated
with a business, lessor, owner, product, use of
property or activity which ceases or is no longer
conducted or available on the premises where such
sign is displayed.
2. "Alteration" means a structural, visual, elec-
trical or mechanical modification to a sign. "Al-
teration" includes change of copy, the addition or
removal of parts, and the replacement of parts,
but does not include normal, periodic mainte-
nance.
3. "Banner" means nonrigid material mounted
to allow movement caused by the wind. National
flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic
flags of an institution, group or business are ex-
cluded.
4. "Bulletin board" means a permanent free-
standing or wall mounted, metal framed, enclosed
sign with dark background, and changeable letters
no larger than two inches and used primarily for
non-commercial public announcements.
5. "Canopy" means a rigid non-movable roof-
like structure.
6. "Development" means any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real property
including, but not limited to, a building or group
of architecturally related buildings, other struc-
tures, subdivision or land partition, landscaping,
grading, filling, paving and placement of a sign.
7. "Directory sign" means a sign listing the
names, uses or locations of not less than three
businesses or activities, conducted within a build-
ing or group of architecturally related buildings.
8. "Fascia" means the flat surface or band
attached to the front of a sloping roof or the edge
of a flat roof. It is parallel to the front of the
building and perpendicular to the ground. It is not
to be construed as the underside of the roof can-
opy.
9. "Flashing sign" means a sign with intermit-
tent illumination, except time or temperature signs.
10. "Freestanding sign" means a sign attached
to the ground by one or more poles, columns or
similar supports and not attached to a building.
11. "Frontage" means the length of a prop-
erty line abutting a public right-of-way.
12. "Height" or "height of sign" means the
vertical distance from ground level to the highest
point of a sign or any vertical and projection
thereof.
13. "Illegal sign" means a sign which is erected,
constructed, altered, relocated or maintained in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
14. "Incidental sign" means a permanent di-
rectional sign, intended for the convenience of the
public and limited to information such as hours,
telephone numbers, credit cards, entrance, exit,
open, closed and information required by law.
15. "Lawn sign" means a freestanding sign
made of lightweight materials such as cardboard
or vinyl that is supported by a frame, pole, or other
support structure placed directly in the ground
without foundation or other anchor.
16. "Marquee" means a projection, perma-
nent, roofed structure attached to and supported
by a building.
17. "Nameplate" means a non-illuminated wall
sign identifying only the name and occupation of
the occupant of the premises.
18. "Nonconforming sign" means a sign law-
fully erected and existing prior to the adoption of
this chapter, but which does not meet the require-
ments of this chapter.
19. "Obscene sign" means a sign which con-
tains words or pictures in which the dominant
theme taken as a whole appeals to the prurient
interest in sex or is patently offensive because if
affronts the contemporary community standard
 16.24.020
174.13 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
relating to the description or representation of
sexual material which is without redeeming social
value.
20. "Obstructing sign" means a sign which
interferes with the use of a fire escape, exit or a
window such that light, ventilation or ingress and
egress is reduced below the minimum required by
law.
21. Reserved.
22. "Pennant" means a triangular flag which
is tapered to a point or swallow tail.
23. "Permit review" means consideration by
the planning commission or city manager of per-
mit application for new signs, sign changes, alter-
ations, relocations, construction and new develop-
ment.
24. "Portable sign" means a sign which is not
permanently affixed to a building, structure or the
ground. Portable signs include, but are not limited
to, A-frames, sandwich boards and portable reader
boards.
25. "Projecting banner" means a banner at-
tached to a flagpole or similar support which is
attached to or projects from a structure or build-
ing face.
26. "Public sign" means a sign erected and
maintained by a municipal, state or federal gov-
ernment, or any political subdivision or agency
thereof.
27. "Reader board" or "changeable copy sign"
means a sign which is not enclosed in a case and is
characterized by changeable track-mounted copy,
which is changed.
28. "Roof sign" means a sign not to exceed
four feet in height erected and maintained upon or
against a sloped flat roof of a building, including
signs attached to any structure containing mechan-
ical equipment. Roofs included in this definition
include mansard, gable, pitched or flat roofs.
29. "Rotating sign" or "moving sign" means a
sign or portion thereof designed to move as a
result of an internal mechanism or the wind. Such
signs shall not include banners or flags.
30. "Sign" means ad identification, descrip-
tion, illustration, symbol or device, but not an
architectural feature of a building which is affixed
directly or indirectly upon a building, vehicle, struc-
ture or lane. Signs identify or direct attention to a
product, place, activity, person, institution, busi-
ness, use, idea, belief, candidate or political issue.
31. "Sign area" shall include the entire sign,
including face, frame, graphic information inciden-
tal to its decoration, and any spacing between
letters, figures and designs. The sign area shall not
include the sign structure. When the sign consists
only of letters, figures or designs which are en-
graved, painted, projected or fixed on a wall, mon-
ument, roof or a window sign, total area of the
sign shall be the area of the smallest geometric
shape or combination of the regular geometric
shapes with which all of the fixed lettering, spac-
ing between letters and graphic information is
displayed.
32. "Sign face" means the surface to which
letters and graphic information are affixed in or-
der to make a sign.
33. "Sign structure" means one or more sup-
ports, uprights, braces, cables or other framework
of a sign.
34. "Shingle sign" means a rigid sign which
projects from a wall, or hangs from a building
canopy, is perpendicular to the building and hor-
izontal to the ground.
Solar Definitions (related to Chapters 16.116
and 16.204):
1. "Crown cover" the area within the drip line
or perimeter of the foliage of a tree.
2. "Exempt tree or vegetation" means the full
height and breadth of vegetation that the city
manager has identified as "solar friendly" that are
listed and kept on file in city hall, and any vegeta-
tion listed on a plat map, or a document recorded
with the plat.
3. "Front lot line" means, for purposes of the
solar access regulations, a lot line abutting a street.
For corner lots the front lot line is that with the
narrowest frontage. When the lot line abutting a
street is curved, the front lot line is the chord or
straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For
16.24.020
174.14(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
a flag lot, the front lot line is the shortest lot line
adjoining the pole portion of the lot, excluding the
unbuildable portion of the pole (see Figure 1).
4. "Non-exempt tree or vegetation" refers to
vegetation that is not exempt.
5. "Northern lot line" means the lot line that
is the smallest angle from a line drawn east-west
and intersecting the northernmost point of the
lot, excluding the pole portion of a flag lot. If the
north line adjoins an undevelopable area other
than a required yard area, the northern lot line
shall be at the north edge of such undevelopable
area. If two lot lines have an identical angle rela-
tive to a line drawn east-west, or if the northern lot
line is less than thirty-five feet, then the northern
lot line shall be a line thirty-five feet in length
within the lot parallel with and at a maximum
distance from the front lot line (see Figure 2).
6. "North-south dimension" means the length
of a line beginning at the mid-point of the north-
ern lot line and extending in a southerly direction
perpendicular to the northern lot line until it reaches
a property boundary (see Figure 3).
7. "Protected solar building line" means a line
on a plat or map recorded with the plat that iden-
tifies the location on a lot where a point two feet
above may not be shaded by structures or non-
exempt trees (see Figure 10).
8. "Shade" means a shadow cast by the shade
point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is
at an altitude of twenty-one and three-tenths de-
grees and an azimuth ranging from twenty-two
and seven-tenths degrees east and west of true
south.
9. "Shade point" means the part of a struc-
ture or non-exempt tree that casts the longest
shadow onto the adjacent northern lot(s) when
the sun is at an altitude of twenty-one and three-
tenths degrees and an azimuth ranging from twenty-
two and seven-tenths degrees east and west of true
south; except a shadow caused by a narrow object
such as a mast or whip antenna, a dish antenna
with a diameter of three feet or less, a chimney,
utility pole or wire. The height of the shade point
shall be measured from the shade point to either
the average elevation at the front lot line or the
elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If
the shade point is located at the north end of a
ridgeline of a structure oriented within forty-five
degrees of a true north-south line, the shade point
height computed according to the preceding sen-
tence may be reduced by three feet. If a structure
has a roof oriented within forty-five degrees of a
true east-west line with a pitch that is flatter than
five feet (vertical) in twelve feet (horizontal) the
shade point will be the eave of the roof. If such a
roof has a pitch that is five feet in twelve feet or
steeper, the shade point will be the peak of the roof
(see Figures 4 and 5).
10. "Shade reduction line" means a line drawn
parallel to the northern lot line that intersects the
shade point (see Figure 6).
11. "Shadow pattern" means a graphic repre-
sentation of an area that would be shaded by the
shade point of a structure or vegetation when the
sun is at an altitude of twenty-one and three-
tenths degrees and an azimuth ranging between
twenty-two and seven-tenths degrees east and west
of true south (see Figure 12).
12. "Solar feature" means a device or combi-
nation of devices or elements that does or will use
direct sunlight as a source of energy for such
purposes as heating or cooling of a structure,
heating or pumping of water, and generating elec-
tricity. Examples of a solar feature include a win-
dow or windows that contain(s) at least twenty
square feet of glazing oriented within forty-five
degrees east and west of true south, a solar green-
house or a solar hot water heater. A solar feature
may be used for purposes in addition to collecting
solar energy, including, but not limited to, serving
as a structural member or part of a roof, wall or
window. A south-facing wall without windows
and without other features that use solar energy is
not a solar feature for purposes of this title.
13. "Solar gain line" means a line parallel to
the northern property line(s) of the lot(s) south of
and adjoining a given lot, including lots separated
only by a street, that intersects the solar feature on
that lot (see Figure 7).
 16.24.020
174.15 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
14. "South" or "south facing" means true
south, or twenty degrees east of magnetic south.
15. "Sunchart" means one or more photo-
graphs that plot the position of the sun between
ten-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. on January 21,
prepared pursuant to guidelines issued by the plan-
ning director. The sunchart shall show the south-
ern skyline through a transparent grid on which is
imposed solar altitude for a forty-five-degree and
thirty minute northern latitude in ten-degree incre-
ments and solar azimuth from true south in fifteen-
degree increments.
16. "Undevelopable area" means an area that
cannot be used practicably for a habitable struc-
ture, because of natural conditions, such as slopes
exceeding twenty percent in a direction greater
than forty-five degrees east or west of true south,
severe topographic relief, water bodies or condi-
tions that isolate one portion of a property from
another portion so that access is not practicable to
the unbuildable portion; or man-made conditions,
such as existing development which isolates a por-
tion of the site and prevents its further develop-
ment; setbacks or development restrictions that
prohibit development of a given area of a lot by
law or private agreement; or existence or absence
of easements or access rights that prevent devel-
opment of a given area.
"Source separated recyclables" means at a min-
imum, recyclable materials designated "principle
recyclable materials" by the State Environmental
Quality Commission under ORS 495A.025, with
the exception of yard debris. Currently these ma-
terials include newspaper, ferrous and non-ferrous
scrap metal, used motor oil, corrugated card-
board, aluminum, container glass, office paper
and tin cans (OAR 340-60-030).
"Specified anatomical areas" means uncov-
ered or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal
human genitals, public areas, post-pubertal hu-
man female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola, or the covered human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
"Specified sexual activities" means human gen-
itals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal,
acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy,
flagellation, torture or bondage either real or sim-
ulated.
"Storage area" means the space necessary to
store mixed solid waste and source separated recy-
clables that accumulate between collection days.
"Street" means a way which provides access to
property, or provides travel between places by
means of vehicles or other modes. A street will
typically include sidewalks and may also serve as a
bikeway.
"Structure" means something constructed or
built, or a piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some defi-
nite manner. Also, see the definition for "build-
ing."
"Structural alteration" means a change to the
supporting members of a structure or building
including foundations, bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams, girders, or any structural change
in the roof or in the exterior walls. (Ord. 102 s
(1.030), 1986)
"Subdivide land" means to divide land into
four or more lots within a calendar year when such
area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous
units of land under single ownership at the begin-
ning of such year.
"Subdivider" or "developer" means that if an
agency or agent is employed by the subdivider or
developer to subdivide or develop, the responsibil-
ities stated in this code will extend to such agency
or agent in order that no evasion of such respon-
sibilities may occur.
"Subdivision" means either an act of subdivid-
ing land or an area or a tract of land subdivided.
"Top of bank" means the stage or elevation at
which water overflows the natural banks of streams
or other waters and begins to inundate the upland.
In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year
recurrence interval flood elevation may be used to
approximate the top of bank.
"Tract" means a parcel of land being subdi-
vided.
"Tree" means a living, standing woody plant
having a trunk diameter six inches or more in
16.24.020
174.16(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
diameter at breast height (dbh) of six inches or
more in diameter, maximum cross section, greater
at four feet above mean ground level at the base of
the trunk.
"Tree canopy" means the total ground area
covered by a tree or grove of trees, as measured at
the outer limit of tree branches or crown, pro-
jected to the ground. This is also referred to as the
tree drip line.
"Tree grove" means a group of trees with an
average diameter at breast height (dbh) of six
inches or greater and height over thirty feet that
form a contiguous canopy with an average diam-
eter of at least one hundred fifty feet.
"Underdeveloped" means a lot or parcel that
has not been fully improved to a use permitted by
the primary district through a city manager or
planning commission review procedure, excluding
the following uses: home occupations, temporary
uses, accessory uses and structures and a detached
dwelling.
"Utilities" refers to infrastructure services which
need to be located in or near the area where the
service is provided. Basic utility uses generally do
not have regular employees at the site. Services
may be public or privately provided. Examples
include water and sewer pump stations; electrical
substations; water towers and reservoirs;
stormwater retention and detention facilities; tele-
phone exchanges; recycling drop-off; mass transit
stations or turnarounds; park-and-ride facilities
for mass transit, but does not include wireless
communication facilities and wireless communica-
tion structures as defined in this section.
Wetland Protection Area Definitions (related
to Chapter 16.114.080 Kingston Terrace District
Goal 5 Safe Harbor Review):
1. "Jurisdictional delineation" means a delin-
eation of the wetland boundaries that is approved
by the Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL).
A delineation is a precise map and documentation
of actual wetland boundaries on a parcel, whereas
a determination may only be a rough map or a
presence/absence finding. [See OAR 141-90-005 et
seq. for specifications for wetland delineation or
determination reports.]
2. "Kingston Terrace District Locally Signif-
icant Wetland Resource Map" means the locally
adopted map used as the basis for Section
16.114.080, which incorporates Oregon Depart-
ment of State Lands (DSL), approved Local Wet-
land Inventory (LWI) map and identifies locally
significant wetlands.
3. "Local Wetlands Inventory (LWI)" means
maps and report entitled [list report that invento-
ries wetlands] and any subsequent revisions as
approved by the Oregon Department of State
Lands.
4. "Locally significant wetland (LSW)" means
a wetland that is determined to be significant un-
der the criteria of OAR 141-86-0300 et seq. These
criteria include those wetlands that score a high
rating for fish or wildlife habitat, hydrologic con-
trol, or water quality improvement functions.
5. "Oregon Freshwater Wetland Assessment
Methodology (OFW AM)" means a wetland func-
tion and quality assessment methodology devel-
oped by the Oregon Department of State Lands.
6. "Wetland" means an area inundated or sat-
urated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and which,
under normal circumstances do support, a preva-
lence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions.
7. "Wetland protection area" means an area
subject to the provisions of this chapter that in-
cludes all wetlands determined to be locally signif-
icant.
"Wireless communication facility" means an
unstaffed facility for transmitting or receiving ra-
dio frequency (RF) signals, often consisting of an
equipment shelter, cabinet or other enclosed struc-
ture. These include both private and public utility
facilities. Examples include, but are not limited to,
cellular telephone antenna, and microwave facili-
ties. It excludes radio antenna (including amateur
short wave radio), television antenna, and televi-
sion receiving dishes for private or nonprofit use.
 16.24.020
174.17 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
"Wireless communication structure" means a
tower, pole, mast, or similar structure which is
used to support a wireless communication facility.
"Yard, front" means a yard extending across
the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and a line parallel thereto at the nearest
point of the main building.

"Yard, rear" means a yard extending across
the full width of the lot between the rear main
building and the nearest point of the rear lot line.

"Yard, side" means a yard between the main
building and the side lot line extending from the
front yard or front lot line where no front yard is
required, to the rear yard. The width of the re-
quired side yard shall be measured horizontally
from the nearest point of the side lot line to the
nearest part of the main building.

(Ord. O-08-02 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. O-02-4 § 2
(part), 2002; Ord. 96-4 § 1 (part), 1996)
(Ord. No. O-98-01, § 2, 10-7-1998; Ord. No. O-2016-
03, § 1(Exh. A), 9-21-2016; Ord. No. O-2018-04,
§ 2(Exh. B), 8-1-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-05, § 1(Exh.
A), 10-17-2018; Ord. No. O-2020-01, § 1(Exh. A),
8-19-2020; Ord. No. 2023-04, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-
2023)
16.24.030 Definitions of land use types.
A. The purpose of the section is to classify
land uses and activities into use categories on the
basis of common functional, product or physical
characteristics. Characteristics include the type and
amount of activity, the type of customers or resi-
dents, how goods or services are sold or delivered,
and certain site factors. The types of uses allowed
in the various zones are based on the goals and
policies of the comprehensive plan.
B. Considerations.
1. Uses are assigned to the category whose
description most closely describes the nature of
the primary use. Developments may have more
than one primary use, and accessory activities may
also be present. Primary and accessory uses are
addressed in subsections (2) and (3) of this sec-
tion.
2. The following factors are considered to
determine what category the use is in, and whether
the activity(ies) constitute primary or accessory
uses:
a. The description of the activity(ies) in rela-
tionship to the characteristics of each use cate-
gory;
b. The relative amount of site or floor space
and equipment devoted to the activity;
c. The relative amount of sales from each
activity;
d. The number and type of customers for
each activity;
e. The relative number of employees in each
activity;
f. Hours of operation;
g. Building and site arrangement;
h. The number and type of vehicles used with
the activity;
i. The relative number of vehicle trips gener-
ated by the activity(ies);
j. Signs;
k. How the use advertises itself; and
l. Whether the activity(ies) would be likely to
be found independent of the other activities on the
site.
16.24.020
174.18(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
3. Multiple Primary Uses. When a develop-
ment has a number of primary uses that fall within
one use category, then the development is assigned
to that use category. For example, if a develop-
ment includes a grocery store and pharmacy, the
development would be classified as a commercial
retail sales and service use.
When the primary uses in a development are
within different use categories, each primary use is
classified in the applicable category and is subject
to the regulations for that category.
4. Accessory Uses. These uses are allowed by
right and are regulated in conjunction with the
primary use unless otherwise stated in this title.
5. Examples and Exceptions. To help illus-
trate the types of uses allowed or not allowed
under a specific uses category, examples and/or
exceptions are given. They are based on the com-
mon meaning of the terms and not on what a
specific use may call itself.
C. Residential Use Types.
"Common courtyard" means a common area
for use by residents of a cottage cluster. A com-
mon courtyard may function as a community yard.
Hard and soft landscape features may be included
in a common courtyard, such as pedestrian paths,
lawn, groundcover, trees, shrubs, patios, benches,
or gazebos.
"Cottage" means an individual dwelling unit
that is part of a cottage cluster.
"Cottage cluster" means a grouping of no fewer
than four detached dwelling units per acre with a
footprint of less than nine hundred square feet
each that includes a common courtyard. Cottage
cluster units may be located on a single lot or
parcel, or on individual lots or parcels.
"Cottage cluster project" means a develop-
ment site with one or more cottage clusters. Each
cottage cluster as part of a cottage cluster project
must have its own common courtyard.
"Dwelling, multi" means a structure that con-
tains five or more dwelling units which may share
common walls, floors or ceilings with one or more
than two dwelling units on one lot. Dwelling units
may be attached or detached.
"Dwelling, single-family attached" means a
dwelling unit, located on its own lot, that shares
one or more common or abutting walls with one
or more dwelling units. It does not share common
floors or ceilings with other dwelling units. Also
referred to as a townhome or townhouse.
"Dwelling, single-family detached" means a
detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.
"Dwelling unit, accessory" means a second
and independent living unit created on a lot with a
primary dwelling, which may be an attached or
detached single-family dwelling or manufactured
home. This second unit is created auxiliary to, and
is always smaller than the primary dwelling. It has
a separate kitchen, living, bathroom, and sleeping
facilities within the primary dwelling or in a sepa-
rate accessory building on the same lot as a pri-
marily dwelling. Because it is considered as an
accessory use, this type of residential unit is not
included in density calculations.
"Duplex" means a structure that contains two
primary dwelling units on one lot. The units may
share common walls, floors or ceilings.
"Family care" includes two types of child care
services and one type for adults.
1. "Family day care" as defined by Oregon
State Statute, refers to the provision of day care
services for children, with or without compensa-
tion, in the home of the caregiver. Family day care
may provide care for six or fewer children full-
time, with an additional four or fewer full-time or
part-time children. During the school year, a fam-
ily day care provider may care for four additional
day care children on days and during the hours
school is not in session. Such children must be at
least an age up to a maximum of four hours per
day. No more than a total of ten children includ-
ing the provider's own children may be present at
any one time.
2. "Day care group home" as defined by Ore-
gon State Statute, is one in which care is provided
in the home of the caregiver, with or without
compensation, for seven through twelve children.
It is subject to certification by the Children Ser-
vices Division. For the purposes of this section,
 16.24.030
174.18.1 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
"full-time" is defined as eight or more hours in a
twenty-four-hour period. "Part-time" is defined as
four or fewer hours in a twenty-four-hour period.
3. "Adult day care" means a community-
based group program designed to meet the needs
of functionally or cognitively impaired adults
through an individual plan of care. It is a struc-
tured, comprehensive program that provides a va-
riety of health, social and related support services
in a protective setting during part of a day but for
less than twenty-four hours. These facilities have
an enrollment of ten or more individuals.
"Fourplex" means a structure that contains
four primary dwelling units on one lot. The units
may share common walls, floors or ceilings.
"Manufactured home" means a structure con-
structed for movement on the public highways
that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities,
that is intended for human occupancy, that is be-
ing used for residential purposes and that was
constructed in accordance with federal manufac-
tured housing construction and safety standards
regulations in effect at the time of construction. It
does not mean any building or structure subject to
the structural specialty code adopted pursuant to
ORS 455.100 to 455.450, any unit identified as a
recreational vehicle by the manufacturer, or a mod-
ular home.
"Mobile home" means a structure constructed
for movement on the public highways that has
sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is
intended for human occupancy, that is being used
for residential purposes and that was constructed
between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and
which met the construction requirements of Ore-
gon mobile home law in effect at the time of con-
struction.
"Manufactured/mobile home park" means a
lot or parcel of land under single ownership on
which two or more manufactured or mobile homes
are occupied as residences. The manufactured/
mobile home sites usually are rented or leased.
"Manufactured home/mobile home subdivi-
sion" means a subdivision designed and approved
for the sale of lots exclusively for manufactured
and/or mobile homes.
"Recreational vehicle" means a unit, with or
without motive power, which is designated for
human occupancy, and is used temporarily for
recreational or emergency purposes as defined in
the Oregon Administrative Rules OAR 918-650-
0005 (18).
"Recreational vehicle park" means a plot of
land upon which two or more recreational vehicle
sites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general
public as temporary living quarters for recre-
ational or vacation purposes as defined in the
Oregon Administrative Rules OAR 918-650-0005
(17)(c).
"Residential facility" means a residential care,
residential training, or residential treatment facil-
ity licensed or registered by the state (Mental Health
and Developmental Services Division) as defined
in ORS 443.400 where residential care alone or in
conjunction with treatment or training or a com-
bination thereof is provided for six to fifteen indi-
viduals who need not be related. Staff persons
needed to meet licensing requirements shall not be
counted in the number of facility residents, and
need not be related to each other or to any resident
of the residential facility.
A residential facility does not include a resi-
dential school; state or local correctional facility;
juvenile training school; youth care center oper-
ated by a county juvenile department; juvenile
detention facility; nursing home; family care facil-
ity; or children's day care as defined by state law.
"Residential home" means a residential treat-
ment or training or an adult foster home licensed
by or under the authority of the state (Mental
Health and Developmental Services Division),
which provides residential care alone or in con-
junction with treatment or training or a combina-
tion thereof for less that six individuals. These
individuals need not be related. Staff persons
needed to meet licensing requirements shall not be
counted in the number of facility residents, and
need not be related to each other or to any resident
of the residential home.
16.24.030
174.18.2(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
"Triplex" means a structure that contains three
primary dwelling units on one lot. The units may
share common walls, floors or ceilings.
D. Commercial Use Types.
"Motel" refers to establishments primarily en-
gaged in the provision of lodging services on a
temporary basis with incidental food, drink and
other sales and services intended for the conve-
nience of guests.
"Office" means a use that is conducted in an
office setting generally for business, government,
professional, medical or financial services.
Examples include professional services such
as lawyers, accountants, engineers or architects;
financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage
houses, bank headquarters or real estate agents;
data processing; sales offices; government offices
and public utility offices; television and radio stu-
dios; medical and dental clinics, medical and den-
tal labs; and blood-collections facilities.
"Retail sales and service" means businesses
that are involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or
used products to the general public. They may also
provide personal services or entertainment, or pro-
vide product repair or services for consumer and
business goods. Such uses are conducted indoors
with limited provisions in this title to allow out-
door storage of material or merchandise. Catego-
ries and examples of retail sales and service uses
include:
1. "Sales-oriented" stores selling, leasing or
renting consumer, home and business goods in-
cluding appliances, art supplies, bicycles, clothing,
dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture,
garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home
improvements, household products, jewelry, li-
quor, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants,
printed material, stationery and food sales.
2. "Personal service-oriented" businesses such
as branch banks; urgency medical care; dental and
medical offices; laundromats; photo or laundry
drop-off; photographic studios; photocopy and
blueprint services; hair, business, and other trade
schools; dance or music classes; veterinarians; and
animal grooming.
3. "Entertainment-oriented" businesses such
as restaurants, cafes and delicatessens; bowling
alleys; health clubs; gyms; and membership clubs
and lodges.
4. "Repair-oriented" businesses such as re-
pair of televisions, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes,
guns, appliances and office equipment; tailor; lock-
smith; and upholsterer.
5. "Drive-through facilities" such as vehicle
drive up windows associated with restaurants,
banks, laundries, photo processing and similar
uses.
Uses not included, thus prohibited, as part of
this definition are:
1. Lumber yards and other building material
sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not
have a retail orientation;
2. Landscape materials stored outside, includ-
ing bark chips, rock, fertilizer and compost;
3. Repair, sale, rental or leasing of commer-
cial or consumer vehicles (except for that allowed
as quick vehicle service), motorcycles, trucks, and
industrial vehicles and equipment;
4. Self-service storage as defined in this chap-
ter;
5. Establishments having any merchandise
items, books, magazines, other publications, films
or videotapes which are for sale, rent or viewing on
the premises and which are distinguished or char-
acterized by their emphasis on matters depicting
the specified sexual activities or specified anatom-
ical areas defined herein;
6. Establishments where entertainment in-
cludes matters depicting specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
"Quick vehicle servicing" means a business
that provides direct services for motor vehicles
where the driver generally waits in the car before
and while the service is performed. The use in-
cludes a drive-through facility and the area where
the service is performed. Examples include:
1. Full-service and mini-serve gas stations;
2. Unattended card key stations;
3. Car washes;
 16.24.030
174.18.3 (King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
4. Quick lubrication services. This use type
does not include servicing of vehicles over ten
thousand pounds gross cargo weight (except for
gasoline), body repairs, welding or painting.
"Self-service storage" means facilities that pro-
vide separate storage areas for rent which are avail-
able to individuals or businesses. The storage areas
are designed to allow private access by the tenant
for storing or removing personal property.
"Street tree" means a tree along public street
frontage, which is located within or adjacent to a
public street right-of-way or easement.
E. Public and Institutional Use Types.
"Community services" means uses of a public,
nonprofit or charitable nature generally providing
a local service to people of the community. Gen-
erally, they provide other service on the site or
have employees at the site on a regular basis. The
service is ongoing, not just for special events. Com-
munity centers or facilities are open to the general
public or have membership provisions that are
open to the general public to join at any time (for
instance, any senior citizen could join a senior
center). The use may also provide special counsel-
ing, education or training of a public, nonprofit or
charitable nature. Examples include libraries, mu-
seums, senior centers, community centers, publicly
owned swimming pools, youth club facilities, hos-
pices, drug and alcohol centers, social service fa-
cilities, vocational training for the physically or
mentally disabled, crematoriums and mausole-
ums. Not included as part of this definition are:
1. Private lodges;
2. Clubs; or
3. Private or commercial athletic or health
clubs (these uses are classified as retail sales and
service).
"Hospital" means a use which provides medi-
cal or surgical care to patients and offers overnight
care.
"Parks and open space" means land that is
primarily left in a natural state or landscaped with
few structures. Examples include parks, play-
grounds, golf courses, cemeteries, public squares,
recreational trails, botanical gardens and nature
preserves.
"Public safety facilities" means public uses that
provide safety and emergency services to the gen-
eral public. Examples include police stations, fire
stations and ambulance stations.
"Religious assembly" means institutions that
are intended to primarily provide meeting areas
for religious activities. Examples include churches,
temples, synagogues and mosques.
"Schools" refer to public and private primary,
elementary, middle, junior high or high schools
that provide state mandated basic education.
"Utilities" refers to infrastructure services which
need to be located in or near the area where the
service is provided. Basic utility uses generally do
not have regular employees at the site. Services
may be public or privately provided. Examples
include water and sewer pump stations; electrical
substations; water towers and reservoirs;
stormwater quality, retention and detention facil-
ities; telephone exchanges; recycling drop-off; mass
transit stops, stations or turnarounds, and park-
and-ride facilities for mass transit. (Ord. O-03-2
§ 1 (part), 2003; Ord. O-02-4 § 2 (part), 2002; Ord.
96-4 § 1 (part), 1996)
(Ord. No. O-2015-01, § 1(Exh. A), 3-18-2015; Ord.
No. O-2020-01, § 1(Exh. A), 8-19-2020; Ord. No.
O-2021-01, § 2(Exh. B), 8-18-2021; Ord. No. 2023-
04, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-2023)
16.24.030
174.18.4(King City Supp. No. 14, 12-23)
16.24.040
Figure 3
NORTH-SOUTH DIMENSION OF THE LOT
T ~I---
..
I
N
NORTH-SOUTH DIMENSION
174-19 (King City Supp. No.2, 3-04)

1-
]6.24.040
Figure 5
SHADE POINT HEIGHT
Measure to average grade at the front lot line.
SHADE POINT HEIGHT
I...
\....'-- Front Lot Une
Figure 6
SHADE REDUCTION LINE
Shade Reduction Une
measured to Shade Point
from Northern Lot Line
(II
(King City Supp. No.2, 3-04)
I
35'
,1. £/'"
i
N
174-20

16.24.040
Figure 7
SOLAR GAIN LINE
.i.
I
N A 10'I
~- Solar Gain Une
-.- North Lot Une of
your South Neighbor
Figure 8
SOLAR BALANCE POINT STANDARD
MAXIMUM SHADE POINT HEIGHT
Protecting your northern
neighbor's ~un
I
..
~ 10'i~ - - - -- -- --- ~~10'i
Standard Side Setbacks
~51~------------~~51
Reduced Side Setbacks
SETBACK ADJUSTMENTS IF NEEDED
TO MEET SOLAR STANDARDS
174-21 (King City Supp. No.2, 3-04)

16.24.040
Figure 9
SOLAR LOT OPTION 1: BASIC REQUIREMENTS
t
N
Front Lot Une is within
30 degbrees of
~.-::::.~--~- an east-west axis
Figure 10
SOLAR LOT OPTION 2: PROTECTED SOLAR BUILDING LINE
(King City supp. No.2, 3-04)
ProtectedSolar
Building Line 30·
ofeas}west
8llis ~
+•: At least 70' between
1--_';": _solar building line and
I middle of lotto fhc -
: south. This will ensure
: ability to build two story
... house.
174-22
t
N

Figure 11
SHADOW PATTERN
16.24.040
22.7" EAST 8. WEST OFTRUE
NORTH-SOUTH AXIS
(Ord. 96-4 § 1 (part), 1996)
174-23
A
I
NORTH
ScottsAvenue
(KingCity Supp. No.2, 3-04)

16.28.010
PLANNING PARTICIPANTS
