6.03 DRIVEWAYS
 Access to private property shall be permitted with the use of a concrete driveway approach,
per Standard Detail 618A or 618B, where curbs exist and with asphalt concrete connections where no
curbs exist. In the case of asphalt concrete connections, the width and depth shall match what is shown in
the standard details for concrete driveway approaches. The access points with the street shall be the
minimum necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe circulation and carrying capacity of the
street. Driveways shall meet all applicable ADA regulations.  If 50% or more of a driveway approach,
inclusive of wings and transition ramps,  is damaged, removed, or replaced, the full driveway approach,
inclusive of wings and transition ramps, shall be replaced to ADA/City standards, except when replacement
would result in the driveway being undrivable (defined as a grade break at the public to private driveway
transition being greater than 18% for a crest or 13% for a sag) or if no permission can be obtained from the
property owner to alter the private portion of the driveway.
 One driveway per site frontage will be the normal maximum. Double frontage lots and corner
lots may be limited to access from a single street, usually the lower classification street. Commercial
City of Gresham Transportation Design PWS Version July 2026
Design Standards Chapter 6 – Page 16 (Last Revised July 2026)
developments with frontage greater than 250- feet may request an additional driveway if needed. If
additional driveways are approved by the Engineer, a finding shall be made that no traffic hazard would
result, impacts on through traffic would be minimal, projected travel demands indicate it is in the interest of
good traffic operations, and adequate street frontage exists to meet the driveway spacing standards of this
section. Restrictions may be imposed on driveways, such as limited turn movements, the req uirement of
shared access between uses, relocation or closure of existing driveways, or other access management
actions.
  In the following circumstances, a new driveway will not be allowed (measured to the driveway
centerline):
A. Within 30-feet of any commercial or industrial property line except when it is a shared-use
driveway serving 2 or more abutting properties;
B. Within 100-feet of the curb return of an intersecting Major or Standard Arterial street;
C. When adequate sight distance cannot be provided.
 Residential driveway approaches  shall be a minimum distance from adjacent property lines
such that driveway approach curb wings and ramped sidewalk do not encroach on adjacent properties ’
frontages, unless approved by the Engineer. If shared driveways are utilized, a minimum of 7- feet of
driveway width shall be on each property frontage. If an exception is granted and there is less than 7-feet
width on an individual property frontage, a shared access easement shall be granted to both properties for
the entire driveway width.
Table 6.03 DRIVEWAY APPROACH LOCATIONS
(Minimum Distance from Driveway Centerline to Curb Return)
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
Major Arterial 100 feet1,3 100 feet1
Standard Arterial 100 feet1,3 100 feet1
Minor Arterial 45 feet3 100 feet1
Major, Standard, Minor Collector 45 feet2,3 100 feet1
Local Transitional, Industrial, Commercial 45 feet2 45 feet
Local Queuing 45 feet2
Minor Access Street 45 feet2
Notes:
1. Minimum distance from curb return unless this prohibits access to the site.
2. Corner lot driveways on a frontage that is less than 75-feet shall be located no more than 7-feet from
the interior property line and shall be no more than 24-feet wide.
3. Direct access to this street may not be allowed if an alternative exists or is planned.

 All d riveway approach widths shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide. Residential driveway
approaches shall be a maximum of 24 feet  wide but may be increased to 30 feet for 3- car garages.
Commercial, industrial and multifamily driveway approaches shall be a maximum of 36 feet wide.
 Driveways entering onto Arterials adjacent to street intersections shall be located beyond the
prevailing queue length for traffic movements on that approach to the intersection. If this requirement
prohibits access to the site, a driveway with restricted turn movements may be required.
 For commercial, industrial, and multifamily developments, shared driveways and internal
access between similar uses are encouraged and may be required to reduce the access points to the higher
classified roadways, to improve internal site circulation, and to reduce local trips or movements on the street
system. Shared driveways or internal access between uses shall be required and will be established by
means of common access easements at the time of development.
City of Gresham Transportation Design PWS Version July 2026
Design Standards Chapter 6 – Page 17 (Last Revised July 2026)
 For instances where the pole of a flag lot is an access easement across another property, that
access easement width will serve as the property frontage width for purposes of driveway width limitations.
6.04 CLEAR VISION AREAS
 A Clear Vision Area shall be maintained on each corner at the intersection of two streets, a
street and a railroad, a street and an alley, a street and a driveway , and a path or trail  and a street. The
Clear Vision Area restricts sight obstructions in the right -of-way as well as on private property. No fence,
wall, landscaping, sign, structure, or parked vehicle that would impede visibility between a height of 3 feet
and 10 feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets, railroad,  driveway, path, or trail shall
be located within the Clear Vision Area. No driveway or off-street parking area shall be located in the Clear
Vision Area. The following intrusions into Clear Vision Areas are allowed:
A. A public utility pole;
B. A tree trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least 8 feet above the level of the intersection;
C. A supporting member or appurtenance to an existing building;
D. An official warning sign or signal;
E. A place where the natural contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility
at the intersection;
F. A sign support structure(s) if combined total width is 12 inches or less, and the combined
total depth is 12 inches or less, or;
G. A chain link fence.
 A Clear Vision Area for intersections of streets shall consist of a triangular area, two sides of
which are the back of the street curb for a distance specified in the image below and Table 6.04. Where the
street curb has a rounded corner, a straight line extended along the back of the curb to a point of intersection
shall be used for measurement.  The third side of the triangle is a line joining the non-intersecting ends of
the other two sides.

 A Clear Vision Area for intersections of streets and an alley shall consist of a triangular area ,
one side of which is the back of the street curb and one side of which is the property line along the alley as

City of Gresham Transportation Design PWS Version July 2026
Design Standards Chapter 6 – Page 18 (Last Revised July 2026)
extended to the street curb, for a distance specified in the table below , and the third side of which is a line
joining the non-intersecting ends of the other two sides.
 A Clear Vision Area for driveways to public streets shall consist of a triangular area,  on both
sides of the driveway , one side of which is the edge of the driveway  as extended to the street curb,  and
one side is the back of the street curb, both measured to the distance specified in the table below. The third
side is a straight line joining the non-intersecting ends of the other two sides.
 A Clear Vision Area for intersections of paths or trails with streets shall consist of a triangular
area, on both sides of the path or trail, one side of which is the edge of the property line along the path or
trail as extended to the street curb,  and one side is  the back of the street curb, both measured to the
distance specified in the table below. The third side is a straight line joining the non-intersecting ends of the
other two sides.
 If a street has no curb or if measuring along a railroad , a straight line parallel and 5 feet from
edge of pavement, or railroad track, shall be used as that side of the triangle. When a street has a multi -
use path the Clear Vision Area measurement shall be as specified in the table below for multi -use paths.
There is no change for alleys or driveways that cross multi-use paths.
Table 6.04 CLEAR VISION AREA MEASUREMENT
LOCATION MINIMUM MEASUREMENT ALONG EACH LINE (feet)
Street Intersections (Including Railroads) 40
Street Intersections with Multi-use Paths 45
Alleys 25
Driveways for Multifamily, Commercial,
Industrial, and Institutional sites 25
Driveways for Detached and Middle
Housing Sites 20
Paths and Trails 20

 With approval of the Engineer, t he driveway Clear Vision Area requirement in the Downtown
Plan District, Civic Neighborhood Plan District , and Rockwood Town Center land use district , may be
waived or modified. When requesting a waiver or modification, the following should generally be the case :
• The street is not an arterial street; and
• Vehicle sightlines meet American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials engineering guidelines without applying a Clear Vision Area on private property ;
and
• The visibility of pedestrians and bicyclists entering and exiting vehicles is retained.
