TDC 36.400.  Lot Dimensions.
(1)  Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage.
(a)  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots must be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from railroad tracks or crossings, traffic on
arterials or collectors, adjacent nonresidential uses, or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation.
TDC 36.330 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC36:20Supp. No. 12
(b)  Vehicular access on double frontage lots must be oriented towards the lowest classifica-
tion street adjacent to the lot as follows:
(i)  Alley;
(ii)  Local street; or
(iii)  Neighborhood route.
(2)  Large Lots. When subdividing, partitioning or adjusting land into large lots which at some future
time are possible to be resubdivided, repartitioned, or readjusted to a size which more closely
conforms to the other lots in the subdivision or area, the applicant must submit a future streets plan.
The future streets plan must indicate that proposed large lots be of such size and shape and contain
such building site restrictions as will provide for the extension and opening of streets at such intervals
and the subsequent division of any such large lot into smaller size lots which meet the requirements
of the TDC.
(3)  Side Lot Lines. The side lines of lots, as far as practicable, must run at right angles to the street
upon which the lots face.
(4)  Lot Size and Shape. The lot size, width, shape and orientation must be appropriate for the
location of the lot and comply with the zone (planning district) standards for the type of development
and use contemplated.
(5)  Frontage on Public Streets. All lots created after September 1, 1979 must abut a public street,
except for the following:
(a)  Secondary condominium lots, which must conform to TDC 73C and TDC 75;
(b)  Lots and tracts created to preserve wetlands, greenways, Natural Areas and Stormwater
Quality Control Facilities identified by TDC Chapters 71, 72, and TMC Chapter 3-5 Surface
Water Management, or for the purpose of preserving park lands in accordance with the Parks
and Recreation Master Plan;
(c)  Residential lots where frontage along a public street is impractical due to physical site
restraints. Access to lots may be provided by a private street under the provisions of Chapter
74.060. The private street must have no adverse impacts to surrounding properties or roads
and may only be approved if it meets the following criteria:
(i)  A public street is not needed to provide access to other adjacent properties as
required by TDC Chapter 74;
(ii)  A recorded document providing for the ownership, use rights, and allocation for
liability for construction and maintenance has been submitted to the City Manager prior to
issuance of a building permit; and
(iii)  Access easements have been provided to all properties needing access to the
driveway.
 TDC 36.400SUBDIVIDING, PARTITIONS, AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
TDC36:21Supp. No. 12
(d)  Lots in the Manufacturing Park Zone Planning District which have access to the public
right-of-way in accordance with TDC 73C and TDC Chapter 75 via permanent access
easement over one or more adjoining properties, creating uninterrupted vehicle and pedestrian
access between the subject lot and the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 1427-19, § 16, 11-25-19; Ord. No. 1451-25, § 7, 8-11-25)
TDC 36.410.  Flexible Lot Subdivisions for RL and RML Zones.
(1)  To allow creativity and flexibility in subdivision design and to address physical constraints, such
as topography, existing development, significant trees and other natural and built features. The
Flexible Lot Subdivision provisions are selected by the applicant and subject to the discretionary
subdivision standards in TDC 36.120 and not the Housing Clear and Objective Standards in TDC
36.125.
(2)  Lot Size for Flexible Lots.
(a)  RL Zone. The minimum lot size may be reduced to 5,000 square feet if:
(i)  The density of the proposed subdivision does not exceed the density allowed in the
zone; and
(ii)  The subdivision consists of:
(A)  Less than nine lots; or
(B)  At least five percent of gross site area on the plat is dedicated as open space.
Stormwater and drainage facilities are not counted toward percentage of open
space requirement.
(b)  RML Zone. The minimum lot size for Detached Single Family Dwellings, Duplexes,
Triplexes, and Quadplexes may be reduced to 3,000 square feet if:
(i)  The density of the proposed subdivision does not exceed the density allowed in the
zone;
(ii)  The site is a minimum of one acre;
(iii)  At least five percent of gross site area is dedicated on the plat as open space.
Proposed open space must be for tree preservation and/or active and passive open
space. Stormwater and drainage facilities are not counted toward percentage of open
space requirement;
(iv)  A minimum of 20 percent of the dwelling units must include Townhomes, Duplexes,
Triplexes, or Quadplexes;
(v)  No more than 70 percent of the approved Single-Family Dwellings may be issued
Building Permits prior to the construction and issuance of Certificates of Occupancy for all
approved housing types (i.e., non-single-family dwellings) in accordance with a City
approved phasing plan; and
TDC 36.400 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC36:22Supp. No. 12
(vi)  All other requirements of the zone must be followed, except as modified by (i)
through (v).
(Ord. No. 1463-21, § 12, 12-13-21)
Editor’s note— Ord. No. 1463-21, § 12, adopted December 13, 2021, repealed § 36.410 and
enacted a new § 36.410 as set out herein. Former § 36.410 pertained to small lot subdivisions for RL
and RML zones.
TDC 36.420.  Increased Density for Greenway and Natural Area Dedications in the RL zone.
In the RL zone, creation of single-family lots smaller than 6,500 square feet will be permitted if land
is dedicated for a Greenway or Natural Area in accordance with the following standards.
(1)  Number of Lots. One small lot is permitted for each 6,500 square foot Greenway or Natural Area
Lot created in the subdivision or partition process.
(2)  Minimum Lot Size and Location. The small lot must:
(a)  Be no less than 5,000 square feet and no more than 5,999.99 square feet;
(b)  Have an average lot width of at least 30 feet;
(c)  Lots that have frontage on a public street must have a minimum lot width of 50 feet or 30
feet for lots on a cul-de-sac bulb;
(d)  Have a maximum building coverage of 45 percent;
(e)  When a small lot abuts an existing lot or is across from a lot on a local street of a
City-approved and recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be no more than 500
square feet smaller than the size of the abutting lot or lot across the street. For purposes of this
subsection, a small lot is directly across the street if one or more of its lot lines—when extended
in a straight line across the local street—intersect the property line of the lot across the street;
(f)  When a tract or easement is between a small lot and an existing lot in a City approved and
recorded subdivision or partition, the small lot must be separated from the existing lot by at
least 50 feet; and
(g)  When a subdivision is constructed in phases, a small lot in a later phase may abut or be
directly across a local street from an existing lot in an earlier phase.
(3)  Maximum Density. The subdivision's or partition's density, net of the Greenway or Natural Area
lots, must not exceed 7.5 dwelling units per acre.
(4)  Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lots. Each Greenway or Natural Area Lot in the
development must be located wholly in:
(a)  Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(b)  Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(5)  Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area
Lot must be one of the following:
(a)  Dedicated to the City at the City's option; or
 TDC 36.420SUBDIVIDING, PARTITIONS, AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
TDC36:23Supp. No. 12
(b)  Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to another public entity; or
(c)  Dedicated to a non-profit conservation organization; or
(d)  Retained in private ownership.
(6)  Ownership Considerations. The City will consider at a minimum the following factors when
determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot, and other factors may
be considered:
(a)  Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian
or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility;
(b)  Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant
trees;
(c)  Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or
intrinsically valuable element;
(d)  Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(e)  Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(f)  Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(g)  Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(h)  Geologic stability of the lot; and
(i)  Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1427-19, § 17, 11-25-19)
