TDC 49.100. Purpose.
TDC 49.200. Use Categories.
TDC 49.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 49.300. Development Standards.
TDC 49.310. Projections into Required Yards.
TDC 49.320. Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural
Areas.
TDC 49.100. Purpose.
The purpose of the Institutional (IN) Zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for public,
educational, religious, recreational, and incidental support facilities to serve the community. The
Zone is intended to:
(1) Be consistent with the Institutional land use designation in the Tualatin Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Support lands and facilities that are owned and operated by governmental or nonprofit entities
and that serve and benefit the community; and
(3) Provide for location and development of permitted and conditionally permitted uses in a manner
that is harmonious with adjacent and nearby residential, commercial, or manufacturing planning
zones and uses; and protects the health, safety, and general welfare of adjacent residential,
commercial, and manufacturing uses.
(Ord. No. 1422-19, § 1, 7-8-19; Ord. No. 1450-20, § 3, 12-14-20)
TDC 49.200. Use Categories.
(1) Use Categories. T able 49-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the IN zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in T able 49-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 49.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2) Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
TDC49:1Supp. No. 4
Table 49-1
Use Categories in the IN Zone
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
Assembly Facilities P (L) Permitted uses limited to places of religious
worship.
Community Services P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to public recreation
buildings and facilities:
• Community recreation building;
• Indoor community aquatic centers.
Conditional uses limited to outdoor public
community aquatic centers
Schools P —
Offices P (L) Permitted uses limited to government offices
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Public Safety and Utility
Facilities
P (L) Permitted uses limited to public works stor-
age yard and shop
Basic Utilities P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to water or sewage
pump stations and pressure reading
stations.
Conditional uses limited to:
• Water reservoirs;
• Electrical substation; and
• Natural gas pumping station.
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Parks and Open Space P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Government-owned parks; and
• Sports fields and tennis courts.
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communication
Facility
P (L) Subject to maximum height and minimum
setback standards in TDC Chapter 73F .
(Ord. No. 1422-19, § 1, 7-8-19)
TDC 49.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Accessory Uses Conditionally Permitted. The following uses may be permitted as a conditional
use when incidental and subordinate to a permitted or conditionally permitted primary use:
(a) Child day care center;
(b) Exterior lighting, if the height of the fixture or standard is greater than the tallest permitted
building on the site; and
TDC 49.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC49:2Supp. No. 4
(c) Outdoor public address or audio amplification system.
(Ord. No. 1422-19, § 1, 7-8-19)
TDC 49.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the IN zone are listed in T able 49-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 49.310.
Table 49-2
Development Standards in the IN Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT
LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
All Uses 1.5 acres
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
Minimum Average Lot Width 100 feet When lot has frontage on public street,
minimum lot width is 40 feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses — As determined through the Subdivi-
sion, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment
process
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with mini-
mum access requirements of TDC 73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 25 feet
Side 0—25 feet As determined through the Architec-
tural Review process
Rear 25 feet
Parking and Vehicle Circulation Areas 5 feet
10 feet
30 feet
Fences 5 feet from public
right-of-way
Conditional Uses — As determined through Conditional Use
Permit and Architectural Review pro-
cess. No minimum setback must be
greater than 50 feet.
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
All Uses 50 feet
(Ord. No. 1422-19, § 1, 7-8-19)
TDC 49.310. Projections into Required Yards.
The following architectural features may project into a required front or rear yard setback area not
more than three feet, and into a required side yard not more than two feet: cornices, eaves, canopies,
decks, sun-shades, gutters, chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamen-
tal features, and other similar architectural features.
TDC 49.310INSTITUTIONAL ZONE (IN)
TDC49:3Supp. No. 2
TDC 49.320. Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural
Areas.
T o preserve natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide
a setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate
land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of the
front, side or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a
result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas. Setback areas that abut
property lines in the RL zone are not eligible for the setback reduction.
(2) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. Each lot must be located wholly in one of the
following conservation or protection areas:
(a) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(b) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(3) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural Area
Lot must be one of the following:
(a) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
(b) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organization; or
(c) Retained in private ownership.
(4) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited to, the
following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or Natural Area Lot:
(a) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway, pedestrian
or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other public facility;
(b) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more significant
trees;
(c) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a unique or
intrinsically valuable element;
(d) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(e) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(f) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(g) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(h) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(i) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19, § 23, 11-25-19)
TDC 49.320 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC49:4Supp. No. 2
CHAPTER 50
OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO)
Sections:
