TDC 50.100. Purpose.
TDC 50.200. Use Categories.
TDC 50.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 50.300. Development Standards.
TDC 50.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 50.100. Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas for professional offices in locations adjacent to or across
the street from residential areas. The zone is intended to provide for office development ranging in
size from small buildings with one or two tenants to large complexes housing business headquar-
ters. Development design in this zone is intended to be sensitive to the preservation of significant
natural resources and to provide extensive perimeter landscaping, especially adjacent to residential
areas and streets.
TDC 50.200. Use Categories.
(1) Use Categories. T able 50-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the CO zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in T able 50-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 50.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2) Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 50-1
Use Categories in the CO Zone
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Residential Accessory Uses P (L) Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care
Home subject to ORS 329A.440.
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Parking P —
Commercial Recreation P (L) Permitted uses limited to health or fitness
facilities as defined by TDC 39.115, with
indoor operation only.
TDC50:1
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Eating and Drinking
Establishments
C (L) Conditional uses limited to restaurants as a
limited use, subject to TDC 50.210(1).
Medical Office P —
Office P —
Retail Sales and Services P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to child day care cen-
ters.
Conditional uses limited to pharmacies, sub-
ject to TDC 50.210(3).
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Light Manufacturing C (L) Conditional uses limited to product assem-
bly, subject to TDC 50.210(4).
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to sewer and water
pump stations and pressure reading sta-
tions.
Conditional uses limited to:
• Electrical substation;
• Natural gas pumping station; and
• Water reservoir.
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Parks and Open Space P (L) Permitted uses limited to an athletic practice
facility.
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communication
Facility
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Wireless Communication Facility, if lo-
cated within 300 feet of the centerline of
Interstate 5; and
• Wireless Communication FacilityAttached.
Conditional uses limited to Wireless Commu-
nication Facility.
Subject to maximum height and minimum
setback standards defined by TDC Chapter
73F .
TDC 50.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC50:2
TDC 50.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or
Industrial Area on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4, the following uses must not be greater than
60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business:
(a) Eating and Drinking Establishment; and
(b) Retail Sales and Services.
(2) Restaurants. Restaurants are allowed with a conditional use permit when designed as an
integral part of a major office complex exceeding 250,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Pharmacies. Pharmacies (as defined by TDC 31.060) are allowed with a conditional use permit
when designed as an integral part of a medical office building, clinic or complex containing at least
30,000 square feet of gross floor area and meeting the following criteria:
(a) Maximum Floor Area. The pharmacy contains no more than 600 square feet of floor area.
Additional floor area may be allowed for other, non-dispensing uses if approved as part of the
conditional use request. In no event must the total floor area of the pharmacy and any related
uses exceed 1200 square feet.
(b) Operations. The sole function of the pharmacy must be oriented toward dispensing
activities associated with prescription drugs and the sale of non-prescription drugs.
(c) Oriented to Patient Traffic. The pharmacy is designed so as to be oriented toward patient
traffic within the building, clinic, or complex, rather than toward passing vehicular traffic.
(d) No Drive-In Windows. Pharmacies allowed in this zone must not include drive-in window
service.
(4) Product Assembly. Assembly of products is allowed with conditional use permit, in conjunction
with office and/or research and development activities, meeting the following criteria:
(a) Review of Operations. All phases of the assembly process are subject to review and
approval by the City Manager or designee prior to issuance of a building permit, in the case of
a business locating in a new building, or prior to issuance of an occupancy certificate, in the
case of a business moving into an existing building.
(b) Associated with Research and Development. The assembled products are the result of
the research and product development of the firm engaged in the assembly process.
(c) Size of Products. The products are characteristically light and small, such as electronic
components, cosmetics, or pharmaceuticals.
(d) Traffic Impacts.The assembly operation does not require rail service, nor does it generate
truck traffic that, through volume and/or turning movements, hamper the efficient flow of traffic
on adjacent streets, as determined by the City Engineer in measuring levels of service.
(e) Office Environment. The assembly process is accomplished in an office type environment
rather than an industrial or manufacturing type environment.
TDC 50.210OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO)
TDC50:3Supp. No. 4
(f) Visual Appearance. The site development and architectural design required for the activity
has the visual appearance of an office campus including low buildings, wood or masonry
facades, and extensive landscaping, as opposed to an industrial or warehouse development.
(g) Size of Site. The site being considered is at least 30 acres in size, however, a 30 or more
acre site can be subdivided into lots of no less than one acre, with assembly operations allowed
on each lot, if prior to any division of the property an overall master site development plan is
reviewed and approved by the City Council as part of the conditional use process. Each lot
created will include deed restrictions requiring the owner and users of the lots to abide by all
provisions of the approved plan. Such deed restrictions will be approved as to form and content
by the City Attorney prior to recording the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, § 24, 12-14-20)
TDC 50.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the CO zone are listed in T able 50-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 50.310.
Table 50-2
Development Standards in the CO Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
All Uses 10,000 square feet.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
Minimum Average Lot Width 80 feet When lot has frontage on public street, min-
imum lot width is 40 feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities
Uses
— As determined through the Subdivision, Par-
tition, or Lot Line Adjustment process.
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with minimum
access requirements of TDC 73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 20 feet
Side and Rear 0—15 feet As determined through Architectural Review
Process, except for structures greater than
35 feet in height, which have the following
minimum side and rear setbacks:
• 30 feet when the yard abuts a lot in the
RL Zone; or
• Zero to 15 feet, as determined through
the Architectural Review process, when
the yard abuts a lot in a multifamily zone.
TDC 50.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC50:4Supp. No. 4
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Corner Lots 0—20 feet along each
frontage
Must be a sufficient distance to provide ade-
quate sight distance for vehicular and pedes-
trian traffic at an intersection, as determined
through the Architectural Review process.
TDC 50.300OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO)
TDC50:4.1Supp. No. 4

STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Parking and Vehicle
Circulation Areas
5 feet Except as approved through Architectural
Review process.
Fences 5 feet From public right-of-way.
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
All Uses 45 feet Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet.
TDC 50.310. Additional Development Standards.
(1) Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play
areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards.
(2) Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. T o preserve
natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front yard
setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate
land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards.
(a) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of
the front yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result
the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one
of the following conservation or protection areas:
(i) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(ii) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(c) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural
Area Lot must be one of the following:
(i) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
(ii) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organiza-
tion; or
(iii) Retained in private ownership.
(d) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not
limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway
or Natural Area Lot:
(i) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway,
pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other
public facility;
(ii) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more
significant trees;
(iii) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a
unique or intrinsically valuable element;
TDC 50.310OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO)
TDC50:5Supp. No. 2
(iv) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(v) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(vi) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(vii) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(viii) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(ix) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1427-19, § 24, 11-25-19)
TDC 50.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC50:6Supp. No. 2
CHAPTER 51
 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE (CN)
Sections:
