TDC 52.100. Purpose.
TDC 52.200. Use Categories.
TDC 52.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 52.300. Development Standards.
TDC 52.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 52.100. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to recognize the unique and valuable physical, scenic, cultural, and
historic character of the Roamer's Rest area located between the Tualatin River and Pacific Highway
(99-W) north of the highway's intersection with Tualatin Road. It is intended to preserve that area by
allowing and encouraging commercial and related uses that are oriented to the traveler on the
highway or that are oriented toward and relate well with the river.
TDC 52.200. Use Categories.
(1) Use Categories. T able 52-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the CR zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in T able 52-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 52.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2) Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 52-1
Use Categories in the CR Zone
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
• Multi-Family Structures;
• Manufactured Dwelling Parks.
Residential Accessory Uses P (L) Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care
Home, subject to ORS 329A.440.
Group Living C (L) Conditional uses limited to residential facili-
ties.
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Lodging P (L) Permitted uses limited to motels.
TDC52:1
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Commercial Recreation P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Boat dock, marina and boat rental;
• Public or private camping or picnic
grounds, including recreational vehicle
parking;
• Private meeting, club or lodge hall; and
• Dance hall.
Conditional uses limited to family recreation
center.
Durable Goods Sales P (L) Permitted uses limited to nursery or green-
house with retail sales, subject to TDC
52.120(3)
Eating and Drinking
Establishments
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Restaurant, without drive-in service;
• Restaurant, take-out;
• T avern or cocktail lounge.
Conditional uses limited to restaurant with
drive-in service.
Quick Vehicle Servicing P (L) Permitted uses limited to Automobile Ser-
vice Station, subject to TDC 52.210(1).
Retail Sales and Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Bakery, for retail sale on the premises
only;
• Marine supply store; and
• Food stores, subject to TDC 52.210(2).
All uses are subject to TDC 52.120(3).
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
Community Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to community cen-
ters, youth or senior centers, open to the
general public.
TDC 52.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC52:2
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to sewer and water
pump stations and pressure reading sta-
tions.
Conditional uses limited to:
• Electrical substation;
• Natural gas pumping station; and
• Water reservoir.
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Parks and Open Areas P —
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communications
Facilities
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to Wireless
Communication Facility Attached.
Conditional uses limited to Wireless
Communication Facility.
Subject to maximum height and minimum
setback standards defined by TDC Chapter
73F .
TDC 52.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Automobile Service Stations. The following development standards apply to all automobile
service stations in the CR planning district:
(a) The minimum street frontage on each street on a corner lot is 120 feet.
(b) The minimum street frontage on an interior lot is 150 feet;
(c) The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet;
(d) The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet;
(e) Only two access points are allowed for an interior lot. A corner lot and a through lot are
allowed only one access per street frontage;
(f) The storage and display of merchandise such as tires and batteries offered for sale must
be conducted in the station building. However, small items such as oil and windshield wiper
blades may be displayed outside the building;
(g) Outside storage or sale of any vehicles is not permitted;
(h) All exterior walls and pump islands must be a minimum distance of 400 feet from the
exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any child day care center or family day care provider,
irrespective of any structures in between; and
TDC 52.210RECREATIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CR)
TDC52:3Supp. No. 4
(i) There must be no major repair or service activity, other than the dispensing of fuel
products, outside the building.
(2) Food Stores. Food stores must not exceed 4,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(3) Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or
Industrial Area on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4, uses in the following categories must not be
greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business:
(a) Retail Sales and Services; and
(b) Durable Goods Sales.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, § 25, 12-14-20)
TDC 52.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the CR zone are listed in T able 52-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 52.310.
Table 52-2
Development Standards in the CR Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
MAXIMUM DENSITY
Multi-Family Structures and
Manufactured Dwelling Parks
10 units per acre —
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
All Uses 10,000 square feet
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
Minimum Average Lot Width 75 feet When lot has frontage on public
street, minimum lot width is 40
feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities Uses — As determined through the Sub-
division, Partition, or Lot Line
Adjustment process
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with
minimum access requirements
of TDC 73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 20 feet
Side and Rear 0 - 15 feet As determined through Architec-
tural Review Process.
TDC 52.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC52:4Supp. No. 4
Corner Lots 0 - 20 feet along each frontage Must be a sufficient distance to
provide adequate sight distance
for vehicular and pedestrian traf-
fic at an intersection, as deter-
mined through the Architectural
Review process.
Parking and Vehicle Circulation
Areas
5 feet From public right-of-way or prop-
erty line, except as approved
throughArchitectural Review pro-
cess.
Fences 5 feet From public right-of-way.
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
All Uses 35 feet Flagpoles may extend up to 100
feet.
TDC 52.310. Additional Development Standards.
(1) Access Management. Wherever possible, as determined by the City Manager or designee,
driveway access will be shared by adjacent properties so that there is no more than one driveway for
every two properties. In any event, no more than one two-way driveway or two one-way driveways
may serve each lot.
(2) Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. T o preserve
natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front yard
setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas that dedicate
land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following standards.
(a) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of
the front yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process, if as a result
the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one
of the following conservation or protection areas:
(i) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(ii) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(c) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural
Area Lot must be one of the following:
(i) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
(ii) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organiza-
tion; or
(iii) Retained in private ownership.
TDC 52.310RECREATIONAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CR)
TDC52:5Supp. No. 4
(d) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but not limited
to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway or
Natural Area Lot:
(i) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway,
pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other
public facility;
(ii) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more
significant trees;
(iii) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a
unique or intrinsically valuable element;
(iv) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(v) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(vi) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(vii) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(viii) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(ix) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19, § 26, 11-25-19)
TDC 52.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC52:6Supp. No. 4
CHAPTER 53
 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (CC)
Sections:
