TDC 54.100. Purpose.
TDC 54.200. Use Categories.
TDC 54.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 54.220. Outdoor Uses.
TDC 54.300. Development Standards.
TDC 54.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 54.100.  Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide areas in the City that are suitable for the widest range of
commercial uses and retail businesses. This district is particularly suitable for automobile-related
businesses and businesses needing direct freeway access.
(Ord. No. 1438-20, § 11, 6-22-20)
TDC 54.200.  Use Categories.
(1)  Use Categories. Table 54-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the CG zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in Table 54-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 54.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 54-1
Use Categories in the CG District
 USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Residential Accessory Uses P (L) Permitted uses limited to Family Child Care
Home, subject to ORS 329A.440.
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Lodging P —
TDC54:1Supp. No. 9
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Commercial Recreation P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:

Amusement enterprise, including pool hall,
bowling alley, dance hall or skating rink; and
Health or fitness facility, outdoor uses limited
subject to TDC 54.220(2).

Conditional uses limited to:

Family recreation center, as defined in TDC
31.060; and

Private meeting hall, club or lodge hall, or
fraternal organizations.
Commercial Parking P —
Durable Goods Sales P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Furniture store, including antiques and
second-hand furniture;
 • Appliance store, subject to TDC 54.210(2);
 • Home improvement store, subject to TDC
54.210(3) and TDC 54.220(4);
 • Auto leasing office, subject to TDC
54.210(4) and TDC 54.220(4); and
 • Boat, boat motor and boat trailer sales
subject to TDC 54.210(5) and TDC
54.220(4).
All uses subject to TDC 54.210(1).
Eating and Drinking
Establishments
P —
Medical Office P —
Office P —
Other Educational and
Vocational Services
P —
Quick Vehicle Servicing P (L) Permitted uses limited to Automobile
Service Stations subject to TDC 54.210(6).
TDC 54.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC54:2Supp. No. 9
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Retail Sales and Services P/C (L) Conditional use permit required for outdoor
pet activity area associated with Pet Day
Care, subject to subject to TDC 54.220(4).
Pet Day Care without outdoor activity area is
permitted outright.
Mortuary not permitted.
All other retail sales and service uses permit-
ted outright.
All uses subject to TDC 54.210(1).
Vehicle Repair P —
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Light Manufacturing P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
Optical lens grinder; and

Testing laboratory.
Vehicle Storage P (L) Permitted uses limited to automobile towing
company office and dispatch office, subject
to TDC 54.220(4).
Warehouse and Freight
Movement
P (L) Permitted uses limited to frozen food locker.
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
Assembly Facilities C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
 • Auditoriums, exhibition halls, or rooms
for public assembly;
 • Churches, synagogues, mosques, tem-
ples or other places of worship; and
 • Theaters.
Colleges, Universities, and
Private Career Schools
P/C Permitted uses limited to a private career
school.
All other uses require conditional use permit.
Community Services P —
Schools C —
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to sewer and water
pump stations, pressure reading stations.
Conditional uses limited to utility substa-
tions.
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Parks and Open Space P (L) Golf courses and country clubs prohibited.
All other uses permitted outright.
 TDC 54.200GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (GC)
TDC54:3Supp. No. 9
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Public Safety Facilities P/C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
 • Fire stations; and
 • Publicly- and privately-operated ambu-
lance facilities.
All other uses permitted outright.
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communication
Facility
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Wireless Communication Facility, if lo-
cated within 300 feet of the centerline of
Interstate 5; and
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached.

Conditional uses limited to Wireless Commu-
nication Facility.
Subject to maximum height and minimum
setback standards defined by TDC Chapter
73F.
(Ord. No. 1484-24, § 3, 4-22-24)
TDC 54.210.  Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1)  Size Limitation on Retail Uses. If located on land designated Employment Area, Corridor or
Industrial Area on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4, uses in the following categories must not be
greater than 60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business:
(a)  Eating and Drinking Establishments;
(b)  Retail Sales and Services; and
(c)  Durable Goods Sales.
(2)  Appliance Stores. Incidental repair of appliances is permitted as an accessory use.
(3)  Home Improvement Stores.
(a)  Garden tractors sold on-site must not exceed 25 horsepower.
(b)  Outdoor storage, display, and sale areas require a conditional use permit and are subject
to additional standards, see TDC 54.220.
(4)  Auto Leasing Office. No more than five (5) vehicles may be stored on site.
(5)  Boat, Boat Motor and Boat Trailer Sales.
(a)  Maintenance, service and repair of boats, motors and trailers is not permitted.
(b)  The scale of products sold on-site is limited as follows:
(i)  Boats must not exceed 18 feet in length;
TDC 54.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC54:4Supp. No. 9
(ii)  Boat motors must not exceed 40 horsepower; and
(iii)  Boat trailers are limited to single axle.
(c)  Outdoor storage, display, and sale areas require a conditional use permit and are subject
to additional standards, see TDC 54.220.
(6)  Automobile Service Station.
(a)  The minimum street frontage on each street on a corner lot is 120 feet.
(b)  The minimum street frontage on an interior lot is 150 feet.
(c)  The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet.
(d)  The minimum pump island set-back from any lot line is 15 feet.
(e)  Only two access points are allowed for an interior lot. A corner lot and a through lot are
allowed only one access per street frontage.
(f)  The storage and display of merchandise such as tires and batteries offered for sale must
be conducted in the station building. However, small items such as oil and windshield wiper
blades may be displayed outside the building.
(g)  Outside storage or sale of any vehicles is not permitted.
(h)  Must comply with TDC Chapter 34.200.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, § 26, 12-14-20)
TDC 54.220.  Outdoor Uses.
All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except as provided by this
section.
(1)  Permitted Uses. Off-street parking and loading, outdoor play areas of child day care centers as
required by state day care certification standards, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities,
and nursery or greenhouse uses are permitted outright as outdoor uses.
(2)  Limited Uses. Health and Fitness Facility uses that include outdoor activities are limited and
subject to additional standards.
(a)  The subject lot is not within 500 feet of a residential planning district.
(b)  The outdoor area must:
(i)  Be completely enclosed with a minimum 8-foot-tall sight-obscuring fence. Slatted
chain link fencing is not an appropriate screening measure; and
(ii)  Outdoor activities must not occur between the hours of 10:00 pm and 7:00 am.
(3)  Temporary Uses. Temporary outdoor sales, as defined in TDC 31.060, are permitted as a
temporary use subject to TDC 33.090.
 TDC 54.220GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (GC)
TDC54:5Supp. No. 9
(4)  Conditional Uses. The following specific outdoor uses require a conditional use permit and are
subject to additional standards.
(a)  Outdoor Storage, Display, and Sales.
(i)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or
15,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(ii)  Not less than 50 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof.
(iii)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store.
(iv)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with
a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet
in height.
(v)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when
viewed from street level.
(b)  Home Improvement Stores.
(i)  The store's gross floor area must be 50,000 square feet or more.
(ii)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or
15,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(iii)  Not less than 50 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof.
(iv)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store.
(v)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with
a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet
in height.
(vi)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when
viewed from street level.
(c)  Boat, Motor Boat, and Boat Trailer Sales.
(i)  Boats, motors, and trailers are allowed, but only if boats, motors, and trailers are not
the primary products sold by the store.
(ii)  The outdoor area must abut a wall of the store.
(iii)  The outdoor area must not exceed ten percent of the store's gross floor area or
5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(iv)  Not less than 25 percent of the outdoor area must be covered by a permanent roof.
(v)  All sides of the outdoor area not abutting a wall of the store must be screened with
a sight obscuring fence, wall, berm, or dense evergreen landscaping not less than six feet
in height.
(vi)  Stored materials must not exceed the height of the sight obscuring barrier when
viewed from street level.
TDC 54.220 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC54:6Supp. No. 9
(d)  Portable Collection Facilities. Portable collection facilities that are an accessory use are
subject to the following standards:
(i)  The facility must be sited such that it is either adjacent to existing vegetation or in a
location where vegetation can be installed to enhance the appearance of the facility;
(ii)  If vegetation is not already in place, landscaping, as approved through the Architec-
tural Review process, must be installed adjacent to the location of the portable collection
facility;
(iii)  Items must not be stored outside the facility, except for temporary storage of
oversized goods;
(iv)  Oversized goods stored outside must be collected daily and removed from the
premises or stored inside the portable collection facility; and
(v)  Adequate receptacle must be provided for items dropped off during times the facility
is not attended.
(e)  Automobile Towing Company Office and Dispatch Office. Outdoor storage of towed
vehicles requires a conditional use permit and is subject to the following standards:
(i)  Vehicle storage must be screened with a solid sight-obscuring wall or fence not less
than six feet in height;
(ii)  A perimeter landscaped area at least five feet in width must be provided on the
outside of the storage area wall or fence as approved through the Architectural Review
process. The perimeter landscaped area must be planted with evergreen plant materials
which will reach the height of the wall or fence within three years from the time of planting;
and
(iii)  The storage area must be paved with asphalt or concrete.
(f)  Outdoor Pet Activity Area Associated with Pet Day Care. Use of an outdoor pet activity
area requires a conditional use permit, which must include a noise, odor and animal waste
material mitigation plan for the design and management of the outdoor pet day care facility,
showing how impacts on neighboring properties and businesses will be eliminated or mini-
mized. Outdoor pet activity areas are subject to the following standards:
(i)  The subject lot is not within 500 feet of a residential planning district and is not in
Blocks 11, 28, and 29 of the Central Urban Renewal District (CURD).
(ii)  The outdoor pet activity area must:
(A)  Be completely enclosed with a minimum 8-foot-tall sight-obscuring fence.
Slatted chain link fencing is not an appropriate screening measure;
(B)  Be a continuously paved impervious surface; and
(C)  Have a drainage system that contains all animal waste material for discharge
to the sanitary sewer system;
 TDC 54.220GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (GC)
TDC54:7Supp. No. 9
(iii)  Outdoor pet day care activities including exercise and training must not occur
between the hours of 8:00 pm and 7:00 am.
(Ord. No. 1484-24, § 3, 4-22-24)
TDC 54.300.  Development Standards.
Development standards in the CG zone are listed in Table 54-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 54.310.
Table 54-2
Development Standards in the CG District

STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
All Uses 10,000 square feet
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
Minimum Average Lot
Width 75 feet
When lot has frontage on public street
or is located on a cul-de-sac street,
minimum lot width at the street must be
40 feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities
Uses —
As determined through the Subdivision,
Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment
process
Flag Lots —
Must be sufficient to comply with
minimum access requirements of TDC
73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 5—20 feet Determined through Architectural
Review Process.
Side and Rear 0—15 feet Determined through Architectural
Review Process.
Rear 0—15 feet Determined through Architectural
Review Process.
Corner Lots 0—20 feet along each
frontage
Must be a sufficient distance to provide
adequate sight distance for vehicular
and pedestrian traffic at an intersection,
as determined through the Architectural
Review process.
Parking and Vehicle
Circulation Areas 5 feet Except as approved through
Architectural Review process.
Fences 5 feet From public right-of-way.
MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT
TDC 54.220 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC54:8Supp. No. 9
All Uses 45 feet
Flagpoles may extend up to 100 feet.
Gateway tower elements are subject to
TDC 54.310(1).
Maximum height within the Leveton Tax
Increment District is 60 feet.
TDC 54.310.  Additional Development Standards.
(1)  Gateway Tower Elements. Gateway Tower Elements are permitted in the CG Planning District,
subject to the following restrictions.
(a)  Location. The Gateway Tower element must be located within a 3.0 acre or larger
commercial center development that is in a CG Planning District and within a 1,000 foot radius
of:
(i)  The intersection of the centerline of SW Nyberg Street with the centerline of
Interstate I-5; and
(ii)  The intersection of the centerline of SW Lower Boones Ferry Road with the
centerline of Interstate I-5.
(b)  Number. A maximum of two (2) Gateway Tower Elements are permitted within a commer-
cial center development, with a minimum separation of 200 feet.
(c)  Height. Gateway Tower Element feature must not exceed a structure height of 60 feet.
(d)  Width and Depth. Gateway Tower Element must not have exterior width, depth, or
diameter dimensions greater than 20 feet nor less than six feet.
(e)  Design.
(i)  Gateway Tower Elements must incorporate architectural details including, but not
limited to, fenestrations; eaves; window openings; and variations in roofline, volume,
massing, and exterior materials. Architectural materials and details must be of a high
quality and must relate to the design elements used on other structures in the develop-
ment site.
(ii)  Gateway Tower Elements must include a gable, hip, dome or pitched roof form
without a spire or pinnacle above. The roof material must be opaque and not transparent
or translucent.
(iii)  Clocks, bells and similar features are prohibited.
(f)  Lighting. A Gateway Tower Element may be illuminated by indirect illumination. Direct
illumination or internal illumination other than light emitted from approved windows or fenes-
trations is prohibited.
(g)  Signage. Signs are prohibited on a Gateway Tower Element structure.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. No. 1438-20, § 12, 6-22-20)
 TDC 54.310GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE (GC)
TDC54:9Supp. No. 9

CHAPTER 55
MID-RISE/OFFICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (CO/MR)
Sections:
