TDC 60.100. Purpose.
TDC 60.200. Use Categories.
TDC 60.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 60.300. Development Standards.
TDC 60.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 60.100. Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for industrial uses and
compatible with adjacent commercial and residential uses. The zone serves to buffer heavy
manufacturing uses from commercial and residential areas. Industrial uses that are environmentally
adverse or pose a hazard to life and safety are prohibited. The zone is suitable for warehousing,
wholesaling, and light manufacturing processes that are not hazardous and do not create undue
amounts of noise, dust, odor, vibration, or smoke. The purpose is also to allow a limited amount of
commercial uses and services and other support uses, including office uses in limited locations in
close proximity to the Commercial Office (CO) district. Commercial uses are not permitted in the
Limited Commercial Setback.
TDC 60.200. Use Categories.
(1) Use Categories. T able 60-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the ML zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in T able 60-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 60.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2) Use Categories in the Limited Commercial Setback. Commercial uses may be further restricted
within the Limited Commercial Setback, see TDC 60.210(4).
(3) Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 60-1
Use Categories in the ML Zone
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living C (L) Conditional uses limited to caretaker residence, ac-
cessory to a permitted industrial use.
TDC60:1
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Parking P (L) Must be located within 60 feet of the CO zone and
subject to TDC 60.210(5).
Commercial Recreation P (L) Permitted uses limited to health or fitness facility if
within 60 feet of the CO district and subject to TDC
60.210(5), or as a limited use in all other locations,
subject to TDC 60.210(2).
Durable Goods Sales and
Service
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC
60.210(1); and
• Retail sale of landscape materials subject to
TDC 60.210(3);
Conditional uses limited to:
• Sale or service of manufactured dwellings;
• Boat sales or rental; rental or leasing of autos
and light trucks with incidental sale of vehicles;
and
• Sale of home improvement materials and sup-
plies.
Eating and Drinking
Establishments
P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC
60.210(1); and
• Restaurant or deli as a secondary use subject to
TDC 60.210(2).
Marijuana Facilities P (L) Subject to TDC Chapter 80.
Office P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Offices for executive, administrative, and profes-
sional uses related to the sale or service of
industrial products;
• Office uses if within 60 feet of the CO zone and
subject to TDC 60.210(5); and
• Office uses including business and commercial
offices, general offices, and real estate offices,
but not governmental offices, are a limited use in
all other locations, subject to TDC 60.210(2).
TDC 60.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC60:2
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Other Educational and
Vocational Services
P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Correspondence, trade, or vocational school as
a secondary use subject to TDC 60.210(2); and
• Trade or industrial school and subject to TDC
60.210(3).
Retail Sales and Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC
60.210(1);
• Food or convenience store, mailing operations,
reproduction or photocopying services, bank, and
medical services as secondary uses subject to
TDC 60.210(2); and
• Child day care center if within 60 feet of the CO
zone and subject to TDC 60.210(5) or if located
within a building that is a permitted industrial use.
Quick Vehicle Service C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
• Automobile Service Stations, subject to TDC
60.210(6); and
• Non-Retail Cardlock Fueling Station, subject to
TDC 60.210(6).
No outside storage or sale of any vehicles is permit-
ted.
Vehicle Repair C (L) Subject to TDC 60.210(3).
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Heavy Manufacturing P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to electroplating.
Conditional uses limited to:
• Manufacture of the following types of products:
bicycles; small electric generators; small electric
motors; motorized boats; sashes and doors; vend-
ing machines.
• Production or fabrication of metals or metal prod-
ucts including enameling and galvanizing
TDC 60.200LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML)
TDC60:3
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Light Manufacturing P/C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
• Machine shop over 7,500 square feet;
• Building, heating, plumbing and electrical con-
tractor's offices, with on-site storage of equip-
ment or materials;
• Casting or fabrication of metals.
All other uses permitted outright.
Solid Waste Treatment and
Recycling
C (L) Conditional uses limited to recycling collection cen-
ter.
Vehicle Storage P (L) Vehicle storage not permitted within the Limited
Commercial Setback.
Vehicles sales not permitted.
All other uses permitted outright in other locations.
Warehouse and Freight
Movement
P/C Conditional use permit required for cold storage
plants.
All other uses permitted outright.
Wholesale Sales P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sales of industrial hand tools, industrial supplies
such as safety equipment and welding equip-
ment, that are products primarily sold wholesale
to other industrial firms or industrial workers; and
• Sale, service and rental of construction and in-
dustrial equipment to contractors and industrial
firms only.
Conditional use required for wholesale sales of build-
ing materials and supplies
INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
Schools C —
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P —
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Public Safety Facilities P (L)/C (L) Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard
and shop.
Conditional uses limited to fire station.
Transportation Facilities P —
TDC 60.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC60:4
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Wireless Communication
Facility
P (L) Subject to maximum height and minimum setback
standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F .
TDC 60.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted,
provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the
gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
(2) Limited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted as limited uses, as specified in T able
60-1, must be located on the same site as a permitted industrial use. The site must be used
substantially for industrial purposes and the commercial use is subject to the following limitations.
The office, retail, and service uses may be located in a standalone building or combined in a building
with other permitted uses.
(a) Offices. Office uses must not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all buildings
on the site.
(b) Retail Sales and Services, Eating and Drinking Establishments, or Other Educational and
Vocational Services. Permitted uses in these categories, as specified in T able 60-1, are subject
to the following additional standards.
(i) Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or
a total of 20,000 square feet of all retail or service uses on the site.
(ii) Spacing Standard. Uses must not be located within 80 feet from any Residential
Planning District and from the right-of-way of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road.
(iii) Access Standard. If located in a standalone building, the uses must not have direct
access onto any arterial or collector street.
(3) Size Limitation on Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted outright or as a Conditional
Use as the primary use of a site, as specified in T able 60-1, are subject to the following size
limitations.
(a) Employment Areas or Corridors. Commercial uses on land designated as an Employment
Area (EA) or Corridor (CO) Design Type on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4 must not exceed
60,000 square feet of gross floor area per building or business.
(b) Industrial Areas. Commercial uses on land designated as an Industrial Area Design Type
on Map 9-4 must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a total of 20,000 square
feet of all commercial uses on the site. Commercial uses permitted in the Limited Commercial
Setback are exempt from this requirement.
(4) Limited Commercial Setback. The purpose of the Limited Commercial Setback is to restrict
commercial uses from locating within 300 feet from the centerline of SW Tualatin Sherwood Road
and SW 124th Avenue and 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway 99W west of Cipole
Road, as depicted in Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5.
(a) Restriction on Commercial Uses. No commercial uses, including parking or outdoor
storage and display areas, are permitted outright in the Limited Commercial Setback.
TDC 60.210LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML)
TDC60:5Supp. No. 4
(b) Conditional Uses. Quick Vehicle Service uses and the sale and service of manufactured
dwellings are permitted as Conditional Uses in the Limited Commercial Setback.
(5) Additional Commercial Office Uses. As specified in T able 60-1, uses permitted in the CO district
are permitted in ML if any portion of the lot is within 60 feet of the CO district boundary, subject to the
following:
(a) Development Standards. Uses must comply with the CO district development standards.
(b) Trip Generation Limit. The gross floor area of the use is limited based on vehicle trip
generation. The limitation is determined through the Architectural Review process using the
following formula: (A x 24) / ITE= MTGSF , where:
(i) A = Developable area (in acres);
(ii) 24 = Vehicle trip generation cap for P .M. peak hour trips per acre of land (constant
determined by city);
(iii) ITE = Average vehicle trips per 1000 square feet gross floor area on a weekday P .M.
peak hour of the adjacent street as determined using the latest edition of the ITE Trip
Generation Manual, or actual trip rate figures based on a traffic analysis approved by the
City Engineer; and
(iv) MTGSF = Maximum thousand gross square feet of floor area allowed on the
developable area.
(c) Continuity Requirement. If CO use is located on a parcel in the ML district it must abut the
CO district.
(6) Automobile Service Stations. Automobile Service Station uses are subject to the following
additional standards.
(a) Spacing Requirements. Automobile Service Station uses must not be located within the
specified distance of the following uses:
(i) Existing Automobile Service Stations. No closer than 3,000 feet to another operating
Quick Vehicle Service use, measured from the closest lot line of the two lots;
(ii) Arterial Streets. No closer than 300 feet from centerline of SW 124th Avenue and
350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway (99W); and
(iii) Day Care Centers. All exterior walls and pump islands must be a minimum distance
of 400 feet from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any day care center or family
day care provider, irrespective of any structures in between.
(b) Development Standards. Quick Vehicle Service Uses are subject to the following addi-
tional development standards.
(i) The minimum street frontage is 120 feet on corner lot and 150 feet on interior lot;
(ii) The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet; and
(iii) The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet.
TDC 60.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC60:6Supp. No. 4
(c) Access Standards. In addition to access standards of TDC Chapter 75, only two access
points are allowed for an interior lot and one access point per street frontage for a corner lot or
through lot.
(d) Accessory Uses. A minimart is permitted as an accessory use, except for at a cardlock
station, provided the minimart does not exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area and no
seating is provided.
(e) Outdoor Storage and Display. The outdoor storage and display of merchandise or
vehicles is not permitted.
(f) Non-Conforming Uses or Structures. Those uses in operation or with a conditional use
permit as of March 25, 2002 that do not meet the spacing or setback standards do not become
non-conforming uses solely because of failure to meet spacing or setback standards.
(7) Spacing Requirement for Conditional Uses. A conditional use must not be located closer than
300 feet to any residential planning district boundary. This requirement does not apply to schools or
transportation facilities and improvements.
(a) Measurement. The spacing standard is measured from the closest point on the building to
the residential planning district boundary and does not include setbacks, parking areas,
circulation areas and landscaping.
(b) Modification of Existing Uses. New buildings, expansions, or additions to existing build-
ings, except for office uses related to on-site operations, must be sited in the following
locations, in order of priority, as site conditions permit:
(i) Must be greater than 300 feet from any residential district;
(ii) Must be the opposite side of existing buildings from any residential district; and
(iii) Must not be closer than existing buildings to any residential district.
(c) Definition of Existing Uses. For purposes of this section, buildings approved through the
Architectural Review process as of September 24, 1990, in accordance with Ordinance
812-90, are considered existing buildings.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, §§ 37, 38, 12-14-20)
TDC 60.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the ML zone are listed in T able 60-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 60.310.
TDC 60.300LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML)
TDC60:7Supp. No. 4
Table 60-2
Development Standards in the ML Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
LOT SIZE
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 square feet —
LOT DIMENSIONS
Minimum Lot Width 100 feet
When lot has frontage on public street,
minimum lot width at the street is 100
feet.
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac
street, minimum lot width at the street is
50 feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities
Uses — As determined through the Subdivision,
Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with minimum
access requirements of TDC 73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 30 feet
Front Setback Adjacent to
Residential or
Manufacturing Park
District
50 feet
Side 0-50 feet
Determined through Architectural Review
Process. No minimum setback if adjacent
to railroad right-of-way or spur track.
Side Setback Adjacent to
Residential or
Manufacturing Park district
50 feet
Rear 0-50 feet
Determined through Architectural Review
Process. No minimum setback if adjacent
to railroad right-of-way or spur track.
Rear Setback Adjacent to
Residential or
Manufacturing Park district
50 feet
Parking and Circulation
Areas 5 feet
No minimum setback required adjacent
to joint access approach in accordance
with TDC 73C.
TDC 60.300 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC60:8Supp. No. 4
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
Parking and Circulation
Areas Adjacent to
Residential or
Manufacturing Park (MP)
District
10 feet
Fences 10 feet From public right-of-way.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT
Maximum Height 50 feet
May be increased to 85 feet if yards
adjacent to structure are not less than a
distance equal to one and one-half times
the height of the structure.
Measured at the 50-foot setback line,
includes flagpoles. The building height
may extend above 28 feet on a plane
beginning at the 50-foot setback line at a
slope of 45 degrees extending away from
the 50-foot setback line.
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet.
Maximum Height Adjacent
to Residential District 28 feet
TDC 60.310. Additional Development Standards.
(1) Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play
areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards.
(2) Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential
district.
(3) Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of
noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited
to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical
transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound
barrier construction must conform to the following standards:
(a) Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must
comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are
proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of
this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or
TDC 60.310LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML)
TDC60:9Supp. No. 4
outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined
through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the
provisions of this section.
(b) Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line
(a direct line between two points) lateral paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property
within a residential planning district and:
(i) Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a
minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or
(ii) Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the
mechanical object to be screened.
(c) Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located
such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound
barrier, on-site sound barrier construction is not required, except that at the time such
structures are removed, sound barrier construction is required.
(d) Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to
reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include
masonry "wing walls" attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter
of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the
tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building.
The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal
distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal.
(e) Definitions. "Wing wall" mean a wall that is attached to a building on one side and meets
the screening requirements of (1) and (2) of this section.
(4) Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. T o preserve
natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side,
or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas
that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of
the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process,
if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one
of the following conservation or protection areas:
(i) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(ii) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(c) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural
Area Lot must be one of the following:
(i) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
TDC 60.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC60:10Supp. No. 4
(ii) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organiza-
tion; or
(iii) Retained in private ownership.
(d) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not
limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway
or Natural Area Lot:
(i) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway,
pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other
public facility;
(ii) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more
significant trees;
(iii) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a
unique or intrinsically valuable element;
(iv) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(v) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(vi) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(vii) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(viii) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(ix) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19, § 29, 11-25-19)
TDC 60.310LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE (ML)
TDC60:11Supp. No. 4

CHAPTER 61
GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
Sections:
