TDC 61.100. Purpose.
TDC 61.200. Use Categories.
TDC 61.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 61.300. Development Standards.
TDC 61.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 61.100. Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide areas of the City that are suitable for a wide range of heavier
manufacturing and processing activities, including those of a more intense nature and impact than
the uses allowed in the Light Manufacturing (ML) Planning Zone. Industrial uses that are environ-
mentally adverse or pose a hazard to life and safety are prohibited. A limited amount of commercial
service and other support uses are permitted as regulated by the Commercial Services Overlay zone
and the Limited Commercial Setback.
TDC 61.200. Use Categories.
(1) Use Categories. T able 61-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the MG zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject to
the limitations listed in T able 61-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 61.210. Limitations may restrict
the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use categories
which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the City
Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as provided
in TDC 31.070.
(2) Use Categories in the Limited Commercial Setback. Commercial uses may be further restricted
within the Limited Commercial Setback, see TDC 60.210(4).
(3) Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 61-1
Use Categories in the MG Zone
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living C (L) Conditional uses limited to one (1) caretaker
residence per site.
COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Agriculture P(L) Permitted uses limited to production of agri-
cultural crops.
TDC61:1
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Commercial Recreation P(L) Limited use in all locations, subject to TDC
61.210(2).
Durable Goods Sales
and Service
P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to
TDC 61.210(1);
• Retail sale of landscape materials sub-
ject to TDC 61.210(3); and
• Additional uses permitted within the Com-
mercial Services Overlay, subject to TDC
61.210(5).
Conditional uses limited to:
• Sale or service of manufactured dwell-
ings;
• Boat sales or rental; rental or leasing of
autos and light trucks with incidental sale
of vehicles; and
• Sale of home improvement materials and
supplies.
Eating and Drinking
Establishments
P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to
TDC 61.210(1); and
• Restaurant or deli as a limited use sub-
ject to TDC 61.210(2).
Marijuana Facilities P (L) Subject to TDC Chapter 80.
Office P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Offices for executive, administrative, and
professional uses related to the sale or
service of industrial products; and
• Office uses including business and com-
mercial offices, general offices, real es-
tate offices, but not governmental offices,
and are a limited use subject to TDC
61.210(2).
Other Educational and
Vocational Services
P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Correspondence, trade, or vocational
school as a limited use subject to TDC
61.210(2); and
• Trade or industrial school and subject to
TDC 61.210(3).
TDC 61.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC61:2
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Retail Sales and Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sale of goods produced on-site subject to
TDC 61.210(1);
• Food or convenience store, health or fit-
ness facility, mailing operations, reproduc-
tion or photocopying services, bank, and
medical services as limited uses subject
to TDC 61.210(2); and
• Within the Commercial Services Overlay,
additional uses subject to TDC 61.210(5).
Quick Vehicle Service C (L) Permitted uses limited to Automobile Ser-
vice Stations subject to TDC 61.210(6);
No outside storage or sale of any vehicles is
permitted.
Vehicle Repair P/C (L) Permitted outright within the Commercial Ser-
vices Overlay.
Conditional use required in other locations
subject to TDC 61.210(3).
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Heavy Manufacturing P (L) Concrete batch plants are not permitted in
the Leveton T ax Increment District.
All other uses permitted outright.
Light Manufacturing P —
Solid Waste Treatment and
Recycling
C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
• Recycling collection center;
• Waste transfer station; and
• Resource recovery facility.
Recycling collection center or waste transfer
station are not permitted within the Limited
Commercial Setback.
TDC 61.200GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
TDC61:3
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Vehicle Storage P/C (L) Conditional use required for bus mainte-
nance and storage facility.
Vehicle storage not permitted within the Lim-
ited Commercial Setback.
Vehicles sales are not permitted.
All other uses permitted outright in other
locations.
Warehouse and Freight
Movement
P/C Conditional use required for warehousing of
building materials and supplies.
All other uses permitted outright.
Wholesale Sales P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
• Sales of industrial hand tools, industrial
supplies such as safety equipment and
welding equipment, that are products pri-
marily sold wholesale to other industrial
firms or industrial workers; and
• Sale, service and rental of construction
and industrial equipment to contractors
and industrial firms only.
Conditional use permit required for whole-
sale sales of building materials and supplies.
INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P —
Greenways and Natural
Areas
P —
Public Safety Facilities P(L)/C (L) Permitted uses limited to public works stor-
age yard and shop
Conditional uses limited to fire station.
TDC 61.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC61:4
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Wireless Communication
Facility
P (L) Commercial radio or TV broadcasting anten-
nas not permitted.
All other uses permitted outright.
Subject to maximum height and minimum
setback standards defined by TDC Chapter
73F .
TDC 61.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted,
provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the
gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
(2) Limited Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted as limited uses, as specified in T able
61-1, must be located on the same lot or parcel as a permitted industrial use. The lot or parcel must
be used substantially for industrial purposes and the commercial use is subject to the following
standards:
(a) Office Uses. Office uses must not exceed 25 percent of the total gross floor area of all
buildings on the lot or parcel.
(b) Retail Sales and Services, Eating and Drinking Establishments, or Other Educational and
Vocational Services. Permitted uses in these categories, as specified in T able 61-1, are subject
to the following additional standards:
(i) Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or
a total of 20,000 square feet of all retail or service uses on the lot or parcel.
(ii) Spacing Standard. Uses must not be located within 80 feet of a Residential Zone.
Uses must not be located within 80 feet of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road right-of-way.
(iii) Access Standard. If located in a stand-alone building, the uses must not have direct
access onto any arterial or collector street.
(3) Size Limitation for Commercial Uses. Commercial uses permitted outright or as a conditional
use, as specified in T able 61-1, are subject to the following size limitations:
(a) Employment Areas or Corridors. Commercial uses must not exceed 60,000 square feet of
gross floor area per building or business on land designated Employment Area (EA) or Corridor
(CO) Design Type on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4.
(b) Industrial Areas. Commercial uses on land designated Industrial Area Design Type on
Comprehensive Plan Map 10-4 must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a
total of 20,000 square feet of all commercial uses on the site. Commercial uses permitted in the
Limited Commercial Setback are exempt from this requirement.
TDC 61.210GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
TDC61:5Supp. No. 4
(4) Limited Commercial Setback. The purpose of the Limited Commercial Setback is to restrict
commercial uses from locating within 300 feet from the centerline of SW Tualatin-Sherwood Road
and SW 124th Avenue and 350 feet from the centerline of SW Pacific Highway (99W) west of Cipole
Road, as depicted in Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5.
(a) Restriction on Commercial Uses. No commercial uses, including parking or outdoor
storage and display areas, are permitted outright in the Limited Commercial Setback.
(b) Conditional Uses. Automobile Service Stations uses and the sale and service of manu-
factured dwellings are permitted as Conditional Uses in the Limited Commercial Setback.
(5) Commercial Services Overlay. The purpose of the Commercial Services Overlay is to provide
for specific commercial services for area businesses and employees. The area of the overlay is
depicted in Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5. Permitted uses are specified in T able 61-1. If a property
is within the Commercial Services Overlay and the Limited Commercial Setback, the regulations of
the Commercial Services Overlay apply.
(a) Permitted Uses. The following additional uses are permitted in the Commercial Services
Overlay on properties shown in the specific areas illustrated on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5
and only when conducted within an enclosed building:
(i) Vehicle Repair;
(ii) Retail Sales and Service are permitted uses limited to automobile accessory sales
and auto parts retailing and wholesaling; tool and equipment rental; and
(iii) Durable Goods Sales are permitted uses are limited to truck-mounted camper sales
with all sales and storage conducted entirely within an enclosed building and not to
exceed 10,000 square feet of building floor area.
(6) Automobile Service Stations. Automobile Service Stations are subject to the following addi-
tional standards:
(a) Spacing Requirements. Automobile Service Stations must not be located within the
specified distance of the following uses:
(i) Existing Automobile Service Stations Uses. No closer than 3,000 feet to another
operating Automobile Service Stations use, measured from the closest lot line of the two
lots;
(ii) 124th Avenue. No closer than 300 feet from centerline of SW 124th Avenue;
(iii) SW Pacific Highway (99W). No closer than 350 feet from the centerline of SW
Pacific Highway (99W); and
(iv) Day Care Centers. All exterior walls and pump islands must be no closer than 400
feet from the exterior walls and outdoor play areas of any day care center or family day
care provider, irrespective of any intermediate structures.
(b) Development Standards. Automobile Service Stations are subject to the following addi-
tional development standards:
(i) The minimum street frontage is 120 feet on corner lot, 150 feet on interior lot;
TDC 61.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC61:6Supp. No. 4
(ii) The minimum building setback from any street right-of-way is 40 feet; and
(iii) The minimum pump island setback from any lot line is 15 feet.
(c) Access Standards. In addition to access standards of TDC Chapter 75, only two access
points are allowed for an interior lot and one access point per street frontage for a corner lot or
through lot.
(d) Minimart as Accessory Uses. A minimart is permitted as an accessory use, provided:
(i) The minimart is not located at a cardlock station;
(ii) The minimart does not exceed 3,500 square feet of gross floor area; and
(iii) No seating is provided.
(e) Outdoor Storage and Display. The outdoor storage and display of merchandise or
vehicles is not permitted.
(f) Non-Conforming Uses or Structures. Those uses in operation or with a conditional use
permit as of March 25, 2002 that do not meet the spacing or setback standards do not become
nonconforming uses solely because of failure to meet spacing or setback standards.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, §§ 39—41, 12-14-20)
TDC 61.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the MG zone are listed in T able 61-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 61.310.
Table 61-2
Development Standards in the MG Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT
LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
LOT SIZE
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 square feet —
LOT DIMENSIONS
Minimum Lot Width 100 feet When lot has frontage on public street,
minimum lot width at the street is 100
feet.
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac
street, minimum lot width at the street
is 50 feet.
Infrastructure and
Utilities Uses
— As determined through the Subdivi-
sion, Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment
process
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with mini-
mum access requirements of TDC 73C.
TDC 61.300GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
TDC61:7Supp. No. 4
STANDARD REQUIREMENT
LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 30 feet
Front Setback Adjacent to Residential
or Manufacturing Park Zone
50 feet
Side 0-50 feet Determined through Architectural Re-
view process. No minimum setback if
adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur
track.
Side Setback Adjacent to Residential
or Manufacturing Park Zone
50 feet
Rear 0-50 feet Determined through Architectural Re-
view process. No minimum setback if
adjacent to railroad right-of-way or spur
track.
Rear setback adjacent to Residential
or Manufacturing Park Zone
50 feet
Parking and Circulation Areas 5 feet No minimum setback required adja-
cent to joint access approach in accor-
dance with TDC 73C.
Parking and Circulation Areas
Adjacent to Residential or
Manufacturing Park Zone
10 feet
Fences 10 feet From public right-of-way.
TDC 61.300 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC61:8Supp. No. 4
STANDARD REQUIREMENT
LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
STRUCTURE HEIGHT
Maximum Height 60 feet May be increased to 100 feet if yards
adjacent to structure are not less than
a distance equal to the height of the
structure.
Measured at the 50-foot setback line,
includes flagpoles. The building height
may extend above 28 feet on a plane
beginning at the 50-foot setback line at
a slope of 45 degrees extending away
from the 50-foot setback line.
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet.
Maximum Height Adjacent to Residen-
tial Zone
28 feet
TDC 61.310. Additional Development Standards.
(1) Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities and outdoor play
areas of child day care centers as required by state day care certification standards.
(2) Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of
noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited
to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical
transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound
barrier construction must conform to the following standards:
(a) Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must
comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are
proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of
this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or
outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined
through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the
provisions of this section.
(b) Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line
lateral (direct line between two points) paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property
within a residential planning district and:
(i) Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a
minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or
TDC 61.310GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
TDC61:9Supp. No. 2
(ii) Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the
mechanical object to be screened.
(c) Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located
such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound
barrier, on-site sound barrier construction is not required, except that at the time such
structures are removed, sound barrier construction is required.
(d) Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to
reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include
masonry "wing walls" attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter
of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the
tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building.
The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal
distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal.
(i) "Wing wall" means a wall that is attached to a building on one side and meets the
screening requirements of (1) and (2) of this section."
(3) Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. T o preserve
natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side,
or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas
that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following
standards.
(a) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of
the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process,
if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one
of the following conservation or protection areas:
(i) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(ii) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(c) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural
Area Lot must be one of the following:
(i) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
(ii) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organiza-
tion; or
(iii) Retained in private ownership.
(d) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not
limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway
or Natural Area Lot:
(i) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway,
pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other
public facility;
TDC 61.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC61:10Supp. No. 2
(ii) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more
significant trees;
(iii) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a
unique or intrinsically valuable element;
(iv) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(v) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(vi) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(vii) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(viii) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(ix) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19, § 30, 11-25-19)
TDC 61.310GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE (MG)
TDC61:11Supp. No. 2

CHAPTER 62
 MANUFACTURING PARK ZONE (MP)
Sections:
