TDC 64.100. Purpose.
TDC 64.200. Use Categories.
TDC 64.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 64.300. Development Standards.
TDC 64.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 64.100.  Purpose.
The purpose of this zone is to provide a mix of light industrial and high-tech uses in a corporate
campus setting. Permitted uses are required to be conducted within a building and uses with
unmitigated hazardous or nuisance effects are restricted. The RSIA-designated area requires at
least one 100-acre parcel and one 50-acre parcel for large industrial users. The remainder of the
area is likely to include light to medium industrial uses with some limited, local-serving commercial
services. The zone is intended to provide for an aesthetically attractive working environment with
campus-like grounds, attractive buildings and other amenities appropriate to an employee oriented
activity. It also is intended to protect existing and future sites for such uses by maintaining large lot
configurations, a cohesive planned-development design and limiting uses to those that are of a
nature that will not conflict with other industrial uses or nearby residential areas of the City.
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 10, 6-10-24)
TDC 64.200.  Use Categories.
(1)  Use Categories. Table 64-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the MBP zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject
to the limitations listed in Table 64-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 64.210. Limitations may
restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use
categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the
City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as
provided in TDC 31.070.
(2)  Overlay Zones. Additional uses may be allowed in a particular overlay zone. See the overlay
zone Chapters for additional uses.
Table 64-1
Use Categories in the MBP Zone
 USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to a caretaker residence if
located in the Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay,
subject to TDC 64.210(4).

In all other locations, caretaker residence may be
permitted as a conditional use.
TDC64:1Supp. No. 9
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
 COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Parking P —
Eating and Drinking Establishments P (L) Permitted uses limited to a restaurant in the Commer-
cial Services Overlay and subject to TDC 64.210(2).
Marijuana Facilities P (L) Subject to TDC Chapter 80.
Office P/C (L) Permitted uses limited, see TDC 64.210(3).
Retail Sales and Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Sale of goods produced on-site subject to TDC
64.210(1); and
 • Within the Commercial Services Overlay, addi-
tional uses subject to TDC 64.210(2).
 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Heavy Manufacturing P (L) Primary processing of organic materials, such as tan-
ning of leather, is prohibited.

All other uses permitted outright.
Light Manufacturing P/C (L) Conditional uses limited to trade and industrial school
or training center. Truck driving schools are prohib-
ited.

All other uses permitted outright.
Warehouse and Freight Movement P (L) Permitted uses limited to warehousing uses that are
accessory to a permitted industrial use, subject to
TDC 64.210(3).
 INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P —
Greenways and Natural Areas. P —
Public Safety Facilities P (L) Permitted uses limited to public works storage yard
and shop.
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communication Facility P/C (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Wireless Communication Facility Attached.

Conditional uses limited to:
 • Wireless Communication Facility.

Subject to maximum height and minimum setback
standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F.
TDC 64.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC64:2Supp. No. 9
TDC 64.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1) Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted,
provided that the retail sale area, including the showroom area, is no greater than five percent of the
gross floor area of the building and does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
(2) Commercial Services Overlay. The purpose of the Commercial Services Overlay is to provide
for specific commercial services for area businesses and employees. The area of the overlay is
depicted in Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5. Commercial uses and development standards are
subject to this section.
(a) Permitted Uses. The following commercial uses are permitted in the Commercial services
Overlay:
(i) Retail Sales and Service. Retail sales and service uses are limited to:
(A) Branch banks and ATM banking kiosks;
(B) Child day care centers;
(C) Food stores;
(D) Dry cleaners; and
(E) Printing, copying and office services.
(ii) Offices. Office uses are limited to general offices or medical and healing arts offices.
(iii) Eating and Drinking Establishments. Eating and drinking establishments are limited
to a restaurant without drive-up or drive through facilities.
(b) Maximum Size. The maximum building size for a permitted use is 3,000 square feet and
the maximum building size for a building with multiple tenants is 20,000 square feet.
(c) Enclosure Requirement. All uses must be conducted within an enclosed building, except
for outdoor play areas of child care centers.
(3) Offices. Office uses are a permitted or conditional use as follows:
(a) Permitted Uses.
(i) Research and Development Offices. Research and development offices and labo-
ratories for chemical, engineering, and physical sciences; medical and pharmaceutical
products; alternative energy production from sources such as solar and wind; industrial
products and consumer products.
(ii) Headquarters Offices. Corporate, regional, or district office headquarters are per-
mitted outright if the headquarters is for any use permitted in this Code, the offices occupy
at least 20,000 square feet, and no manufacturing is conducted that is otherwise not a
permitted use in the MBP zone.
(b) Accessory Uses to an Industrial Use. Offices that are accessory uses to a permitted
industrial use are permitted.
(c) Conditional Uses. The following are conditional uses:
(i) Film and video production;
TDC 64.210MANUFACTURING BUSINESS PARK ZONE (MBP)
TDC64:3Supp. No. 4
(ii) Call center or customer service center; and
(iii) Data processing or data storage center.
(4) Tonquin Light Manufacturing Overlay. Additional uses are permitted in the T onquin Light
Manufacturing Overlay, shown on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5. Uses within the overlay are
subject to the standards of this section.
(a) Additional Permitted Uses. All permitted or conditional uses in the Light Manufacturing
Zone are permitted under the same status in the MBP Zone, except that the following uses are
permitted outright: contracting firms with on-site storage of equipment and materials; machine
shop, including automotive and truck machine shop, of 7,500 square feet or larger; cold
storage warehouse; motor freight facility, including office, repair, and maintenance, and
transfer and storage for vehicles, equipment, and materials; and caretaker residence.
(b) Additional Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the
overlay:
(i) Restaurant, without drive-up or drive through facilities, with a maximum floor area of
3,000 square feet; and
(ii) Industrial card lock fueling facility with 3,000 feet separation from another facility.
(c) Expanded or New Permitted Use. Expanded or new permitted uses, including expanded
or new outdoor storage, must be reviewed according to TDC Chapter 32 (Procedures) for the
Architectural Review Application Review Process, and requires both Architectural Features
and Public Facilities review consistent with TDC Chapters 73A through 73G, and 74.
(d) Nonconforming Use. All existing uses not listed as permitted uses in TDC 64.210(4)(a)
are allowed as non-conforming uses. Expansion of these uses may occur only to the extent
and as provided in TDC Chapter 35 (Nonconforming Situations).
(e) Annexation Agreement. An Annexation Agreement must be prepared when one or more
property owners with the T onquin Light Manufacturing Overlay submits a petition for annexa-
tion to the City.
(5) Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities, outdoor storage of
materials and products directly related to the permitted use and outdoor play areas of child day care
centers as required by state day care certification standards.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, §§ 43, 44, 12-14-20)
TDC 64.300. Development Standards.
Development standards in the MBP zone are listed in T able 64-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 64.310.
TDC 64.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC64:4Supp. No. 4
Table 64-2
Development Standards in the MBP Zone
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
LOT SIZE
Minimum Lot Size for
Parcels not Identified in
the RSIA
20,000 square feet See Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5 for
RSIA boundaries.
Minimum Lot Size for
Parcels Identified in the
RSIA
—
See Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5 for
RSIA boundaries.
Minimum lot size subject to see TDC
64.310(3).
LOT DIMENSIONS
Minimum Lot Width 100 feet
When lot has frontage on public street,
minimum lot width at the street is 100
feet.
When lot has frontage on cul-de-sac
street, minimum lot width at the street is
50 feet.
Infrastructure and Utilities
Uses — As determined through the Subdivision,
Partition, or Lot Line Adjustment process.
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with minimum
access requirements of TDC 73C.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
Front 30-50 feet
Side 0-100 feet
Determined through Architectural Review
Process.
No minimum setback if adjacent to
railroad right-of-way or spur track.
For a Corner Lot, the minimum setback
must be 30-50 feet from a public street.
Rear 0-100 feet
Determined through Architectural Review
Process. No minimum setback if adjacent
to railroad right-of-way or spur track.
Rear Setback Adjacent to
Residential or
Manufacturing Park
District
50 feet
TDC 64.300MANUFACTURING BUSINESS PARK ZONE (MBP)
TDC64:5Supp. No. 4
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE
REFERENCES
Parking and Circulation
Areas Adjacent to Public
Right-of-Way
20-25 feet —
Parking and Circulation
Areas Adjacent to any
Other Property Line
10 feet
Private Streets 5 feet —
Fences 50 feet From public right-of-way.
STRUCTURE HEIGHT
Maximum Height 65 feet
May be increased to 85 feet if yards
adjacent to structure are not less than a
distance equal to one and one-half times
the height of the structure.
Flagpoles may extend to 100 feet.
Maximum Height Adjacent
to Residential District 28 feet
Measured at the 50-foot setback line,
includes flagpoles. The building height
may extend above 28 feet on a plane
beginning at the 50-foot setback line at a
slope of 45 degrees extending away from
the 50-foot setback line.
(Ord. No. 1450-20, § 45, 12-14-20)
TDC 64.310. Additional Development Standards.
(1) Industrial Master Plan. Minimum lot size, setbacks, maximum height, and other development
standards may be modified by submittal of an Industrial Master Plan application. See TDC 33.050.
(2) Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential
district.
(3) Minimum Lot Size in RSIA. In accordance with the Metro RSIA designation and Metro
Ordinance No. 02-969B and No. 02-990A, the minimum lot area for one or more parcels in the RSIA
identified on Comprehensive Plan Map 10-5 is 100 acres and 50 acres. When the minimum lot area
of one or more Lots of Record in the RSIA is 100 acres, the minimum lot area for one or more lots may
be reduced to 50 acres.
(a) When the minimum lot area requirements for RSIA designated properties in subsection
(4) are met through a land platting process or established in an Industrial Master Plan process,
the minimum lot size for remaining parcels located in the RSIA is 20,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum lot area of a property within the RSIA may be reduced to less than 100 acres
or 50 acres pursuant to an approved Industrial Master Plan as provided in TDC 33.050.
TDC 64.300 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC64:6Supp. No. 4
(c) Lots or remnant areas created by the location of public streets may be less than 100 acres
if necessary to create a logical, safe network of streets in the zone.
(4) Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of
noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including but not limited
to heating, cooling and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical
transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound
barrier construction must conform to the following standards:
(a) Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must
comply with the provisions of this section. When additions or changes to existing facilities are
proposed, existing structures on the property may be required to comply with the provisions of
this section, as determined through the Architectural Review process. Where buildings or
outdoor use areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use as determined
through the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to comply with the
provisions of this section.
(b) Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line
lateral (direct line between two points) paths of 450 feet or less between a residential property
within a residential planning district and:
(i) Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a
minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or
(ii) Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the
mechanical object to be screened.
(c) Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located
such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound
barrier, on-site sound barrier construction must not be required, except that at the time such
structures are removed, sound barrier construction must be required.
(d) Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to
reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include
masonry wing walls attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as at the perimeter
of the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the
tallest overhead door they are designed to screen at the point where they meet the building.
The height of the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal
distance twice the vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal.
(5) Wetland Conservation Lots. No minimum lot size, width or frontage requirement must apply to
wetland conservation lots.
(6) Setbacks for Conditional Uses. Setback requirements for conditional uses must be as deter-
mined and approved through the Conditional Use Permit process in accordance with TDC Chapter
33 and the Architectural Review process in accordance with TDC Chapter 33 and TDC Chapter 73A
through 73F . However, no setback greater than 50 feet may be required.
TDC 64.310MANUFACTURING BUSINESS PARK ZONE (MBP)
TDC64:7Supp. No. 4
(7) Setback Reduction for Developments Adjacent to Greenways and Natural Areas. T o preserve
natural areas and habitat for fish and wildlife, the decision-making authority may provide a front, side,
or rear yard setback reduction for developments that are adjacent to Greenways or Natural Areas
that dedicate land for conservation or public recreational purposes, in accordance with the following
standards.
(a) Setback Reduction. All permitted uses may be allowed a reduction of up to 35 percent of
the front, side, or rear yard setbacks, as determined through the Architectural Review process,
if as a result the buildings are farther away from fish and wildlife habitat areas.
(b) Location of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. A portion of the parcel must be located in one
of the following conservation or protection areas:
(i) Natural Resource Protection Overlay (NRPO) District (TDC Chapter 72); or
(ii) Clean Water Services Vegetated Corridor.
(c) Ownership of Greenway or Natural Area Lot. The ownership of each Greenway or Natural
Area Lot must be one of the following:
(i) Dedicated to the City at the City's option;
(ii) Dedicated in a manner approved by the City to a non-profit conservation organiza-
tion; or
(iii) Retained in private ownership.
(d) Ownership Considerations. The decision-making authority must consider, but is not
limited to, the following factors when determining the appropriate ownership of the Greenway
or Natural Area Lot:
(i) Does the Park and Recreation Master Plan designate the lot for a greenway,
pedestrian or bike path, public park, recreation, overlook or interpretive facility, or other
public facility;
(ii) Does the lot include one or more designated Heritage Trees, or one or more
significant trees;
(iii) Does the lot provide a significant view or esthetic element, or does it include a
unique or intrinsically valuable element;
(iv) Does the lot connect publicly owned or publicly accessible properties;
(v) Does the lot abut an existing park, greenway, natural area or other public facility;
(vi) Does the lot provide a public benefit or serve a public need;
(vii) Does the lot contain environmental hazards;
(viii) Geologic stability of the lot; and
(ix) Future maintenance costs for the lot.
(Ord. 1414-18, 12-10-18; Ord. 1427-19, § 31, 11-25-19;Ord. No. 1450-20, § 46, 12-14-20)
TDC 64.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC64:8Supp. No. 4
CHAPTER 65
 BASALT CREEK EMPLOYMENT ZONE (BCE)
Sections:
