TDC 65.100. Purpose.
TDC 65.200. Use Categories.
TDC 65.210. Additional Limitations on Uses.
TDC 65.300. Development Standards.
TDC 65.310. Additional Development Standards.
TDC 65.100.  Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to implement the goals of the Basalt Creek Concept Plan, to provide an
environment conducive to the development and protection of employment uses that contribute to the
local economy and support nearby residential uses. Such permitted uses must not cause objection-
able noise, smoke, odor, dust, noxious gases, vibration, glare, heat, fire hazard or other wastes
emanating from the property to protect public health, safety and general welfare. The emphasis of
the zone is on providing a variety of manufacturing, office, and incubator space for established and
emerging businesses, typically in a flex-space development pattern. Commercial uses are allowed
but limited in intensity to maintain adequate employment development opportunities.
(Ord. No. 1480-23, § 9, 8-28-23)
TDC 65.200.  Use Categories.
(1)  Use Categories. Table 65-1 lists use categories Permitted Outright (P) or Conditionally
Permitted (C) in the BCE zone. Use categories may also be designated as Limited (L) and subject
to the limitations listed in Table 65-1 and restrictions identified in TDC 65.210. Limitations may
restrict the specific type of use, location, size, or other characteristics of the use category. Use
categories which are not listed are prohibited within the zone, except for uses which are found by the
City Manager or appointee to be of a similar character and to meet the purpose of this zone, as
provided in TDC 31.070.
Table 65-1
Use Categories in the BCE Zone
 USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
Household Living C (L) Conditional uses limited to a caretaker residence
when necessary for security purposes.
 COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
Commercial Recreation P (L) Permitted uses limited to a health or fitness facility
subject to TDC 65.210(1).
Eating and Drinking Establishments P (L) Drive-through facilities prohibited

All other uses subject to TDC 65.210(1).
Mobile Food Unit Development P (L) Permitted uses limited subject to TDC 65.210(2).
Medical Office P (L) Permitted uses limited subject to TDC 65.210(1).
TDC65:1Supp. No. 12
USE CATEGORY STATUS LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Office P (L) Permitted uses limited subject to TDC 65.210(3).
Other Educational and Vocational Services P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Correspondence, trade, or vocational schools;
and
 • Job training or related services subject to TDC
65.210(1).
Retail Sales and Services P (L) Drive-through facilities prohibited.

Permitted uses limited to:
• Child day care center permitted subject to TDC
34.200.
• Retail Sales and Services uses subject to TDC
65.210(1) and (4).
 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
Heavy Manufacturing P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Casting or fabrication of metals, including
electroplating;
 • Manufacture, assembly, processing, or
packaging of the following types of products:
batteries; bicycles; boilers; bottles; brick, tile or
terra cotta; cans; chainsaws; dryers; electric
generators; electric motors; electric
transformers; engines, larger gasoline or diesel;
freezers; heating and cooling equipment;
ladders; lawnmowers; manufactured dwellings;
marine pleasure craft; motor vehicles; paint;
prefabricated building or structural members for
buildings; sashes and doors; signs and display
structures; refrigerators; rototillers; vending
machines; washing machines; and windows;
 • Other similar advanced manufacturing uses as
determined by application of TDC 31.070.
Light Manufacturing P/C (L) Conditional uses limited to:
• Trade and industrial school or training center.
Truck driving schools are prohibited.

All other uses Permitted outright, except:
• Building, heating, plumbing and electrical
contractor's offices, with on-site storage of
equipment or materials are prohibited.
Warehouse and Freight Movement P/C (L) Permitted and Conditional uses limited subject to
TDC 65.210(5).
Wholesale Sales P (L) Permitted uses limited to:
 • Sales of industrial products primarily sold
wholesale to other industrial firms or industrial
workers, subject to TDC 65.210(6).
 INFRASTRUCTURE AND UTILITIES USE CATEGORIES
Basic Utilities P —
Greenways and Natural Areas P —
Public Safety Facilities C (L) Conditional uses limited to a fire station.
Transportation Facilities P —
Wireless Communication Facility P (L) Subject to maximum height and minimum setback
standards defined by TDC Chapter 73F.
(Ord. No. 1480-23, § 9, 8-28-23; Ord. No. 1454-25, § 1(Exhs. 2, 3), 11-24-25)
TDC 65.200 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC65:2Supp. No. 12
TDC 65.210.  Additional Limitations on Uses.
(1)  Commercial Recreation, Eating and Drinking Establishments, Medical Office, Vocational
Services, and/or Retail Sales and Services. Except for Child Day Care Centers, permitted uses in
these categories, as specified in Table 65-1, are subject to the following additional standards.
(a)  Maximum Size. The use must not exceed 5,000 square feet for any individual use or a
total of 20,000 square feet of uses on the site.
(b)  Location Standard. The use or uses must be located on a lot, parcel or development site
that has at least 150 feet of frontage on SW Graham's Ferry Road.
(2)  Mobile Food Unit Development. A mobile food unit development is a permitted use as specified
below.
(a)  Maximum Size. A mobile food unit development may contain up to ten mobile food units.
Each mobile food unit must not exceed 200 square feet. The combination of mobile food units
and additional structures accessory to or in support of the development must not exceed
20,000 square feet.
(b)  Location Standard. One single mobile food unit development within the BCE district is
allowed and must be located on a lot, parcel or development site that has at least 150 feet of
frontage on SW Graham's Ferry Road.
(c)  Outdoor Storage. All operations must be conducted within a structure or within an area
that is screened from public view.
(d)  Architectural Review Required. A mobile food unit development is subject to Architectural
Review and Approval under TDC 33. Compliance with associated development standards is
required.
(3)  Offices. Offices are a permitted use as specified below.
(a)  Uses Accessory to an Industrial Use. Office uses accessory to a permitted light and/or
heavy manufacturing use are permitted.
(b)  Limited Uses. A primary office use must not exceed 20,000 square feet on the site.
(4)  Sale of Goods Produced On-Site. The retail sale of goods produced on-site is permitted,
provided that the retail sale area does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(5)  Warehouse and Freight Movement. Warehouse and freight movement is allowed as specified
below.
(a)  Limited Use as Accessory to a Manufacturing Use. The use must be conducted wholly in
conjunction with a permitted light and/or heavy manufacturing use on the same lot, parcel, or
development site, and facilitate the storage and distribution of goods produced on-site.
(i)  Maximum Size. The use must not exceed more than 50 percent of the gross floor
area of the permitted light and/or heavy manufacturing use. A Conditional Use Permit is
required for uses greater than 50 percent and up to 200 percent of the gross floor area of
the permitted light and/or heavy manufacturing use.
 TDC 65.210BASALT CREEK EMPLOYMENT ZONE (BCE)
TDC65:3Supp. No. 12
(b)  Other Limited Uses. A primary warehouse and freight movement use may be permitted on
a site that includes a light and/or heavy manufacturing use comprising a minimum of 30 percent
of the total building square footage on the site. No single building may exceed 150,000 square
feet in size.
(6)  Wholesale Sales. Wholesale sales is a permitted use as specified below.
(a)  Limited Uses. A primary wholesale sales use is limited to the sales of industrial products
primarily sold wholesale to other industrial firms or industrial workers may be permitted on a
site that includes a light and/or heavy manufacturing use comprising a minimum of 30 percent
of the total building square footage on the site. No single building may exceed 150,000 square
feet in size.
(7)  Outdoor Uses. All uses must be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except
off-street parking and loading, Basic Utilities, Wireless Communication Facilities or as otherwise
provided by this section.
(Ord. No. 1480-23, § 9, 8-28-23)
TDC 65.300.  Development Standards.
Development standards in the BCE zone are listed in Table 65-2. Additional standards may apply to
some uses and situations, see TDC 65.310.
Table 65-2
Development Standards in the BCE Zone
 STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
 LOT SIZE
Minimum Lot Size 2 acres
Minimum Lot Size for Standalone Commercial
Uses
10,000 square feet
 LOT DIMENSIONS
Flag Lots — Must be sufficient to comply with minimum
access requirements of TDC 73C.
 MINIMUM SETBACKS
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent
to Streets or Alleys
30 feet
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent
to Streets or Alleys for Commercial Uses
10 feet
Minimum Building Setback for Yards Adjacent
to Residential District
30 feet
Minimum Setback for Side and Rear Yards not
Adjacent to Streets or Alleys
10 feet No minimum setback if adjacent to railroad
right-of-way or spur track.
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to
Public Right-of-Way
20 feet No minimum setback required adjacent to joint
access approach in accordance with TDC 73C.
Parking and Circulation Areas Adjacent to
Private Property Line
10 feet No minimum setback required adjacent to joint
access approach in accordance with TDC 73C.
Fences Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way 10 feet
 STRUCTURE HEIGHT
TDC 65.210 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC65:4Supp. No. 12
STANDARD REQUIREMENT LIMITATIONS AND CODE REFERENCES
Maximum Height 45 feet For any structure within 100 feet of a
residential zone (measured from property line
or centerline of public right-of-way, if separated
by a street) that entire structure must be limited
to the maximum height of that residential zone.
(Ord. No. 1480-23, § 9, 8-28-23)
TDC 65.310.  Additional Development Standards.
(1)  Spur Rail Tracks. Spur rail tracks are not permitted within 200 feet of an adjacent residential
district.
(2)  Wetland Conservation Lots. Minimum lot size, width, or frontage requirement do not apply to
wetland conservation lots.
(3)  Landscape Buffer Adjacent to Residential Uses. A landscaped area, meeting the Type D
standard described in Table 73B-4, must be located along property lines abutting residential zones.
(4)  Fences Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way. Decorative fencing is encouraged. Open fencing
(such as chain-link or slatted chain-link fencing) must be screened from public-right-of-way by a
minimum 10-foot-wide landscape area that is planted with a hedge of narrow or broad leaf evergreen
shrubs and which will form a four-foot high continuous screen within two years of planting.
(5)  Sound Barrier Construction. Sound barrier construction is required to mitigate the impact of
noise associated with overhead doors and building mechanical equipment, including, but not limited
to, heating, cooling, and ventilation equipment, compressors, waste evacuation systems, electrical
transformers, and other motorized or powered machinery located on the exterior of a building. Sound
barrier construction must conform to the following standards:
(a)  Applicability. New construction, including additions or changes to existing facilities, must
comply with the provisions of this section, as determined by the Architectural Review process.
Where buildings or outdoor areas located on more than one parcel are all part of a single use
as determined by the Architectural Review process, all of the parcels may be required to
comply with the provisions of this section.
(b)  Distance from Residential Use. Sound barriers must be used to intercept all straight-line
lateral (direct line between two points) paths of 450 feet or less between a property within a
residential planning district and:
(i)  Any side edge of an overhead door or other doorway larger than 64 square feet, at a
minimum height of eight feet above the floor elevation of the doorway; or
(ii)  Any building mechanical device at a minimum height equal to the height of the
mechanical object to be screened.
(c)  Exemption for Existing Structures. Where existing structures (on or off site) are located
such that they will reflect sound away from residential areas and will function as a sound
barrier, on-site sound barrier construction must not be required, except that at the time such
structures are removed, sound barrier construction must be required.
 TDC 65.310BASALT CREEK EMPLOYMENT ZONE (BCE)
TDC65:5Supp. No. 12
(d)  Design. Sound barriers must consist of masonry walls or earth berms located so as to
reflect sound away from, rather than toward, noise sensitive properties. This may include
masonry wing walls attached to a building, detached masonry walls (such as the perimeter of
the site), earth berms, or combinations of the three. Wing walls must be at least as tall as the
tallest overhead door they are designed to screen where they meet the building. The height of
the wall may be reduced along a maximum incline formed by a horizontal distance twice the
vertical change in height, or 26.5 degrees from horizontal.
(Ord. No. 1480-23, § 9, 8-28-23)
TDC 65.310 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC65:6Supp. No. 12
