TDC 73A.020.  Residential Design Standards Applicability; Exceptions.
(1)  Applicability. The Residential Design Standards apply to:
(a)  New single-family dwelling;
(b)  Duplex; Triplex, or Quadplex;
(c)  Townhouses;
(d)  An addition or alteration to an existing single-family dwelling, duplex, triplex, quadplex, or
townhouse when it results in:
(i)  A 35 percent or more expansion of the structure's existing footprint.
(ii)  An increase in building height of 35 percent or more.
(iii)  A 35 percent or more alteration of an existing wall plane.
(e)  The creation of a new dwelling unit or units through conversion of an existing residential
structure, resulting in a duplex, triplex, or quadplex.
(2)  Exceptions.
(a)  The Residential Design Standards in subsection (1) do not apply to a side wall plane that
abuts the side yard of an adjacent dwelling.
(b)  Façades of dwellings that are separated from a street by another dwelling are exempt
from meeting the standards in TDC 73A.030(1) and (2).
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 11, 6-10-24; Ord. No. 1454-25, § 1(Exhs. 2, 3), 11-24-25)
TDC 73A.030.  Clear and Objective Residential (Type I) Design Standards.
Residential housing types using the Clear and Objective (Type I) standards must comply with the
following:
(1)  Front Face. The front face of a residential structure must contain:
(a)  Windows that occupy at least 12 percent of the wall plane.
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to ten percent if one additional Residential Wall
Design Element is provided beyond the minimum.
(ii)  This requirement may be reduced to eight percent if two or more additional
Residential Wall Design Element are provided beyond the minimum.
(iii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage.
(b)  At least three Residential Roof Design Elements; and
TDC 73A.010 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC73A:2Supp. No. 12
(c)  At least five of the Residential Wall Design Elements.
(2)  Rear. The rear of a residential structure must contain:
(a)  Windows that occupy at least 12 percent of the wall plane
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to ten percent if one or more additional Residential
Wall Design Element is provided beyond the minimum.
(ii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage.
(b)  At least two Residential Roof Design Elements; and
(c)  At least four Residential Wall Design Elements
(3)  Side-Corner Lot. If the side of a residential structure abuts a public street, the side must contain:
(a)  Windows that occupy at least eight percent of the wall plane;
(i)  This requirement may be reduced to six percent of the wall plane if one or more
additional Residential Wall Design Elements are provided on the same side elevation.
(ii)  Garage door windows may be counted toward the window coverage percentage.
(b)  At least two Residential Roof Design Elements; and
(c)  At least four Residential Wall Design Elements.
(4)  Walkways. Walkways must be provided for single-family dwellings, dup lexes, triplexes,
quadplexes, and townhouses as follows:
(a)  A walkway is required to connect main entrances to sidewalks along the adjacent public
right-of-way, in accordance with the following:
(i)  For single-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, at least one main
entrance of each residential structure must have a connection to the sidewalk.
(ii)  For townhouses, the main entrance of each townhouse must have a connection to
the sidewalk.
(b)  Walkways must be a minimum of three feet in width;
(c)  Walkways must be constructed of asphalt, concrete, pervious concrete, pavers, or
grasscrete; and
(d)  The walkways must meet ADA standards applicable at time of construction or alteration.
(e)  For single-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, this standard may be met by
a driveway that has a walkway connection to the main entrance and that connects to the public
right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 11, 6-10-24; Ord. No. 1454-25, § 1(Exhs. 2, 3), 11-24-25)
 TDC 73A.030SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
TDC73A:3Supp. No. 12
TDC 73A.040.  Type I Residential Roof Design Elements.
The following are the Type I Residential roof design elements:
(1)  Dormer, such as hipped, gabled, shed, or eyebrow dormer design, which is a projecting
structure built out from a sloping roof and housing a window, vent, or decorative element.
(2)  Pitched or sloping roof, such as a gable roof, which slopes downward in two parts from a central
ridge forming a gable at each end, or hip roof, which has sloping ends and sides that meet at an
inclined projecting angle.
(3)  Roof eave of at least 12 inches.
(4)  Roof overhang (barge-board or verge board) of at least six inches measured outward from the
face of the dwelling wall or wall plane.
(5)  Window, decorative vent, door, decorated verge boards, trusses, false beams, corbels,
brackets, or other decorative element(s) in gable ends; and
(6)  Variation in roof pitch, height of roof planes, or roof orientation, such as in a roof with multi-level
eaves.
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 11, 6-10-24)
TDC 73A.050.  Type I Residential Wall Design Elements.
The following are the Type I Residential wall design elements:
(1)  Recessed entry—Front façade only;
(2)  Portico—Front façade only. A roofed porch-like space, open along at least one side, connected
to the main dwelling entrance, supported by columns or pillars, and either protruding from or
recessed within the main dwelling structure;
(3)  Covered porch at least 36 square feet in area and at least four feet deep;
(4)  Balcony, which development from the wall plane and is enclosed by a railing or parapet (low
protective wall);
(5)  Vertical offsets, at least two, either projecting or recessed, and at least six inches deep and a
minimum of four feet long;
(6)  Horizontal offset, either projecting or recessed, at least five inches deep;
(7)  Bay window, box window, or box bay, which development at least six inches outward from the
wall plane and forms a bay, alcove, or window seat;
(8)  Column or pilaster, either complete or engaged (where one part of its surface is in contact with
a wall plane), and in the wall plane, at a change in wall plane, or at a corner of the dwelling;
(9)  Exterior chimney of brick, stone, composite masonry or similar materials;
(10)  Engaged tower, either square, rectangular, circular or polygonal in form;
TDC 73A.040 TUALATIN DEVELOPMENT CODE
TDC73A:4Supp. No. 12
(11)  Window trim or surround (casing) at least three and one-half inches wide that completely
surrounds the window, either with or without a sill beneath the window;
(12)  Window grids, windows with multi-paned sashes, or elliptical, palladian, segmental arch,
semicircular, or similarly shaped windows;
(13)  Lintel, arch, or similar decorative header casing on windows, the main entry door, portico,
garage door(s), or other opening in the wall plane;
(14)  Shutters, as a matched pair for or on a window, either movable or fixed, designed to cover a
window and filter light, and usually of wood or similar construction and paneled or fitted with louvers;
(15)  Variation in wall cladding, wall-surface pattern, or decorative materials such as shakes,
shingles, brick, stone or other similar;
(16)  Decorative or "architectural" garage door(s), with or without windows, and including patterning
relief at least five-eighths inches deep over the door(s) surface, excepting the window area if
windows are present;
(17)  Decorative trellis or trellis-work, consisting of open rafter ends or beams and cross pieces to
create the appearance of a structure over which climbing plants might be trained to grow; and
(18)  Band, band course, band molding, belly band, belt course, or similar horizontal element of
relatively slight projection marking a division in the wall plane and adding architectural interest to a
façade or elevation.
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 11, 6-10-24)
TDC 73A.060.  Discretionary (Type II) Residential Development Design Standards.
As an alternative to the clear and objective Type I standards, residential housing (including detached
single-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, and townhomes), may be reviewed under
Type II discretionary standards. Such applications must demonstrate compliance with the following
discretionary standards:
(1)  All roofs must be pitched or sloping and articulated by use of such elements as dormers,
gables, overhangs or eaves, and must have variations in roof pitch, height of roof planes, or roof
orientation to create visual interest and avoid monotony in appearance;
(2)  Architectural articulation and other design elements, such as balconies, porches, dormers, bay
windows, vertical or horizontal offsets, variations in cladding, or moldings must be used on all sides
of the dwelling (except for the side of a dwelling adjacent to another dwelling) to avoid stark
unarticulated building façades (elevations), to minimize the scale and visual impact of a continuous
flat wall surface, and to create a sense of visual interest for passersby and neighboring property
owners;
(3)  The architectural character (i.e., exterior materials, architectural articulation, design elements,
etc.) of the front façade (elevation) of the dwelling must be utilized on all sides of the structure to
create a unified appearance and to avoid a single block or box appearance;
 TDC 73A.060SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
TDC73A:5Supp. No. 12
(4)  New dwellings must be designed and situated on a property in order to create and maintain a
visual sense of harmony with surrounding development and must not overwhelm the scale of
surrounding development; and
(5)  The overall architectural design of the dwelling must foster a compatible, positive relationship
with the scale and character of the street, and the scale and character of surrounding existing
development.
(6)  Pedestrian connections must be provided from main entrances to the sidewalk in the public
right-of-way. Connections should be reasonably direct and constructed of sufficient width and
material for safe and convenient access.
(Ord. No. 1486-24, § 11, 6-10-24; Ord. No. 1454-25, § 1(Exhs. 2, 3), 11-24-25)
