Skip to main content

Loading…

Wood Village, OR Development Code

Home

Previous

Section 350

Next
Toggle site navigation Menu

City of Wood Village

Development Code

300, Additional Use and Development Regulations

Section 350, Parking and Loading

Motor Vehicle Parking

350.030, General Regulations

Home

Contents

Track
Legislative History

Share
This Page Your Selections

Settings

Help

City of Wood Village

Development Code

300, Additional Use and Development Regulations

Section 350, Parking and Loading

Motor Vehicle Parking

350.030, General Regulations

Search Within This

350.030 General Regulations.

This section is included in your selections.

A. Where the Regulations Apply. The regulations of this section apply to all parking areas in all zones, whether required by the code or put in for the convenience of property owners or users. Parking areas include those accessory to a use, or for a park and ride use in the Basic Utilities use category.

B. Occupancy. All required parking areas must be completed and landscaped prior to occupancy of any structure except as provided in Section 330 - Landscaping and Screening.

C. Use of Required Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces must be available for the use of residents, customers, or employees of the use. Fees may be charged for the use of required parking spaces. Required parking spaces may not be assigned in any way to a use on another site, except for joint parking situations (see Section 350.045), or to redevelop a portion of a parking lot for transit oriented uses including bus stops, pullouts, shelters, park and ride stations and similar facilities as approved by the City in cooperation with Tri-Met. Redevelopment or joint use of a parking lot may occur only when the underlying parking stall requirements have been met. Required parking spaces may not be used for the parking of equipment or storage of goods or inoperable vehicles.

D. Curb Cuts. Access points with the street shall be the minimum necessary to provide access while not inhibiting the safe circulation and carrying capacity of the street. Curb cuts shall be designed to established City standards.

E. Proximity of Parking to Use. Required parking spaces for residential uses must be located on the site of the use. Required parking spaces for nonresidential uses must be located on the site of the use or in parking areas whose closest point is within 250 feet of the site.

Your Selections

What’s Nearby

Section

200 300 400

Section

345 350 360

Article

§ 350.020 Motor Vehicle Parking Required Parking Spaces

Section

350.030

The Wood Village Development Code is current through Ordinance 3-2022, passed August 23, 2022.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Wood Village Development Code. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.woodvillageor.gov
Hosted by ICC Code Solutions.
Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Cookie Preferences

Contents
×

All Publications

Municipal Code

Development Code

City Charter

Your Selections

Wood Village Municipal Code Wood Village Development Code Wood Village Charter

Expand All Collapse All

Share Clear
Close

View Full Table

View Full Image

View Full File
×

Go to Top Go to Bottom Share/Save Close

Save, Share, Bookmark or Print History of This Subsection
