Skip to main content

Loading…

Wood Village, OR Development Code

Home

720.020

Section 720

Section 730
Toggle site navigation Menu

City of Wood Village

Development Code

700, General Terms

Section 720, Definitions

720.030, Definitions

Home

Contents

Track
Legislative History

Share
This Page Your Selections

Settings

Help

City of Wood Village

Development Code

700, General Terms

Section 720, Definitions

720.030, Definitions

Search Within This

720.030 Definitions.

This section is included in your selections.

The definitions of words with specific meaning in the zoning code are as follows:

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A habitable living unit that provides the basic requirements for shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation, in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures may be attached or detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include: garages, decks, fences, trellises, flag poles, stairways, heat pumps, small-scale residential energy equipment serving only the residents on the site, awnings, and other structures. See also Primary Structure.

ACCESSORY USE. A use or activity which is a subordinate part of a primary use and which is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site.

ALTERNATIVE OR POST INCARCERATION FACILITY. A residential use where the residents are on probation or parole.

APPLICANT. A person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner such as a builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.

ATTACHED STRUCTURE. Any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, by a roof, or by structural connections that allow pedestrian access to both structures. For example, decks or stairways are attached structures when they are connected to another structure. A garage may be attached to another structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway. Structures connected by an "I" beam or similar connections are not considered attached.

BUILDABLE LAND. Lands in urban and urbanized areas available for development.

BUILDING. A structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides.

BUILDING COVERAGE. The area that is covered by buildings or other roofed structures, including eaves.

BUILDING LINE. A building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front, rear or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannot lawfully extend, except as provided for in this ordinance.

CHORD. Means a straight line joining the ends of an arc.

CITY. The City of Wood Village, Oregon.

CITY MANAGER. The appointed chief administrative officer of the City who is generally responsible for the administration of all City ordinances.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The current adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City of Wood Village.

CONCEPT PLAN REGULATING DIAGRAM. The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram refers to Figure 235 – 1, which, along with requirements in Chapter 235 and other applicable chapters and sections of Wood Village Zoning and Development Code, establishes the requirements for development within the Town Center Zone area.

The Concept Plan Regulating Diagram adopted in 2017 replaces and supersedes any Town Center Master Plan adopted prior to that date, and may be modified as provided in Chapter 235.

COTTAGE HOUSING. See Residential Structure Types.

COUNCIL. The City Council of Wood Village, Oregon.

DAYS. Calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days.

DESIRED CHARACTER. The preferred and envisioned character (usually of an area) based on the purpose statement or character statement of the base zone, overlay zone, or plan district. It also includes the preferred and envisioned character based on any adopted area plans or design guidelines for an area.

DEVELOPMENT RELATED DEFINITIONS

•ALTERATION. A physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Alteration does include the following:

- Changes to the facade of a building;

- Changes to the interior of a building;

- Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;

- Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

- Changes to exterior improvements;

- Changes to landscaping; and

- Changes in the topography of the site.

See also Structural alteration of a sign, under Sign-Related Definitions.

•DEVELOP. To construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including excavations and fills.

•DEVELOPMENT. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land.

•EXTERIOR ALTERATION. A physical change to a site that is outside of any buildings. Exterior alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. Exterior alteration does include the following:

- Changes to the facade of a building;

- Increases or decreases in floor area that result in changes to the exterior of a building;

- Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

- Changes to exterior improvements;

- Changes to landscaping; and

- Changes in the topography of the site.

•EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS. All improvements except buildings or other roofed structures. Exterior improvements include surface parking and load areas, paved and graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. It includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include vegetation landscaping, natural geologic forms, or unimproved land. See also Development.

•NEW DEVELOPMENT. Development of a site that was previously unimproved or that has had previously existing buildings demolished.

•STRUCTURE. Any object constructed in or on the ground. Structure includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. Structure does not include paved areas or vegetation landscaping materials.

DISABLED PERSON. For the purposes of this Code, a disabled person is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1991 and state law.

DRIVEWAYS. The area that provides vehicular access to a site. A driveway is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb site. A driveway begins at the property line and extends into the site. Driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas.

DUPLEX. See Residential Structure Types.

EMPLOYMENT RELATED DEFINITIONS

•COMPETITIVE SHORT TERM SUPPLY OF LAND: means the short term supply of land provides a range of site sizes and locations to accommodate the market needs of a variety of industrial and other employment uses.

•INDUSTRIAL USE: means employment activities generating income from the production, handling, or distribution of goods. Industrial uses include but are not limited to: manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, storage, logistics, importation and transshipment, research and development. Industrial uses may have external impacts on surrounding uses and may cluster in traditional areas where they are segregated from other non industrial activities.

•OTHER EMPLOYMENT USE: Means all non industrial employment activities including the widest range of retail, wholesale, service, non-profit, business headquarters, administrative and governmental employment activities that are accommodated in retail, office and flexible building types. Other employment uses also include employment activities of an entity or organization that serve the medical, educational, social service, recreation and security needs of the community typically in large buildings or multi-purpose building campuses.

•VACANT LAND - means lot or parcel that is either:

- Equal to or larger than one half-acre not currently containing permanent building or improvements; or,

- Equal to or larger than five acres where less than one-half acre is occupied by permanent buildings or improvements.

EXCAVATING OR FILLING. The removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar non-decomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. Excavating or filling does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. Excavating or filling includes the terms grading, preloading, surcharging, and stockpiling.

EXTERIOR ALTERATION. See Development-Related Definitions.

EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS. See Development-Related Definitions.

EXTERIOR DISPLAY. Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Exterior display is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales, and plant nurseries. Exterior display does not include goods that area being stored or parked outside. It does not include damaged vehicles, vehicles or equipment being services, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. See Exterior Work Activities and Exterior Storage.

EXTERIOR STORAGE. Exterior storage includes the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals, gravel; building materials, packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; and other similar items. Examples are lumber yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, and the storage of goods used in manufacturing. Damaged or inoperable vehicles or vehicles which have missing parts, that are kept outside, are included as exterior storage. The storage of motor vehicles which do not have any missing parts or damage that is visible from the outside of the vehicle is considered parking rather than exterior storage. The storage of motor vehicles that have minor dents or other minor defects in the body is also considered parking rather than storage if the motor vehicle is in working order. (See Exterior Display and Exterior Work Activities).

EXTERIOR WORK ACTIVITIES. Exterior work activities include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. Exterior work activities do not include normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. (See Exterior Display and Exterior Storage).

FLOOR AREA. The total floor area of the portion of a building that is above ground. Floor area is measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Floor area includes the area devoted to structured parking that is above ground level. Floor area does not include the following:

- Areas where the elevation of the floor is 4 feet or more below the lowest elevation of an adjacent right-of-way;

- Roof area;

- Roof top mechanical equipment; and

- Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter.

FLOOR AREA RATIO. The amount of Floor Area in square feet divided by the amount of Net Land Area in square feet.

FOOD CART. Mobile Food Cart is as any vehicle that is self-propelled or that can be pulled or pushed down a sidewalk, street, highway or waterway, on which food is prepared, processed or converted or which is used in selling and dispensing food to the ultimate consumer.

FOOD POD. A single site that includes three (3) or more food carts.

FRONTAGE. That portion of a lot abutting on a street; i.e., the front lot line. On corner or through lots the frontage may be designated by the owner but it should be consistent with the orientation of the other lots and improvements on the same side of the street. In the Town Center Zone (Section 235), frontage is defined as the portion of a lot, block, parcel or other property that abuts a public street or public easement.

GAMING. Means any and all establishments that offer legalized gambling authorized where any one of the following characteristics applies:

- The establishment is referred as a “Gaming establishment”, or makes any reference to legalized gambling by signage, advertisement or by name; and/or:

- Five or more gambling machines are on premises; and/or

- A card table is on the premises.

GARAGES. A covered structure intended to provide shelter for passenger vehicles that is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, or mobile homes. It includes carports. A garage may be attached or detached from another structure.

GRADE. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.

GRADE. (Adjacent Ground Elevation) The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, pacing or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line, or when the property line is more than 5 feet from the building between the building and a line 5 feet from the building.

GRADE, FINISHED. The final or finish elevation of the ground surface after the development.

GRADE, NATURAL. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition.

GROUP LIVING STRUCTURE. See Residential Structure Types.

HOME OCCUPATION. A business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the Household Living use on the site.

HOUSE. See Residential Structure Type.

HOUSEHOLD. One (1) or more persons occupying a single housing unit.

INTENSITY. The amount or magnitude of a use on a site or allowed in a zone. Generally, it is measured by floor area. It may also be measured by such things as number of employees, amount of production, trip generation, or hours of operation. See also Density.

KENNEL. Any location where 5 or more dogs or cats aged 6 months or older, are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores are not classified as kennels.

LAND AREA, NET. The net area for a site is defined as the proposed development project area minus any unbuildable area. The following areas are deemed unbuildable for the purposes of calculating Net Land Area:

(1) In the Town Center Zone, specific dedications for roadways and pathways required by the Concept Plan Regulating Diagram or other mandatory provisions, whether publicly dedicated or privately held; and identified as Main Street, Local Street, or Universal Street, along with the Multi-use Path/Trail shall be treated as unbuildable.

(2) Environmentally constrained lands, such as open water areas, floodplains, water quality facilities, wetlands, natural resource areas, tree preservation areas, and vegetated corridor (buffer) areas, when identified for protection from development on an approved site plan or set aside in a conservation easement, a separate tract, or dedicated to a public entity; and

(3) Land set aside for plazas or open space, or in separate tracts, or dedicated to a public entity for schools, parks, or open space purposes; and

(4) At the Applicant’s discretion, up to 100 percent of the area of topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than 25 percent within a landslide hazard area, and

(5) At the Applicant’s discretion, up to 50 percent of the area of topographical features with a slope equal to or greater than 15 percent within a landslide hazard area.

LAND DIVISION. A lot or parcel of land created through the process of dividing land.

LAND USE APPROVAL. A land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.

LANDSCAPE FRONTAGE. A Landscape Frontage is set back from the street-facing property line by a wide landscaped strip between the building and the sidewalk. A Landscape Frontage is appropriate along streets where the existing streetscape may not be conducive to pedestrian- oriented ground floor retail, such as where there is no on-street parking or where streets are very wide. Ground floor entries must still be provided along and connected to the sidewalk.

LARGE SCALE RETAIL. For purposes of the Community Retail requirement of Section 235.275, “large scale retail uses” are those single retail uses containing 60,000 or more square feet of gross leasable area.

LEGISLATIVE ACTION. Any action which would result in a change in City policy including but not limited to: change to the comprehensive plan text; change to the comprehensive plan map which involves a number of parcels of land; change to the text of an implementing ordinance; change to the zoning map which involves a number of parcels of land; change to any land use plan or map which represents a change in City land use policy.

LOADING AREA. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading of passengers, freight, or other articles.

LOT. A lot is a legally defined piece of land that is the result of subdividing or partitioning land. This definition includes the State definition of both lot, (result of subdividing), and parcel (result of partitioning). See also, Ownership and Site.

CORNER LOT. A lot has frontage on more than one intersecting street. A street that curves with angles that are 120 degrees or less is considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot. See Figure 710-1.

Figure 710-1. Corner Lots

FLAG LOTS. A lot located behind another lot that has normal street frontage. A flag lot includes a strip of land that goes out to the street and is generally used for an access drive. There are two distinct parts to a flag lot; the flay which comprises the actual building site located behind another lot, and the pole which provides access from the street to the flag. A flag lot results from the division of a large lot with the required area and depth for two lots, but which has insufficient width to locate both lots on the street frontage. See Figure 710-2.

Figure 710-2. Flag Lot

THROUGH LOT. A lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

LOT AREA. The total horizontal area enclosed within the lot lines of a lot.

LOT COVERAGE. The area covered by primary and accessory buildings. Lot coverage shall be expressed as percentage of the total lot area.

LOT DEPTH, AVERAGE. The average distance from the narrowest frontage to the lot line opposite.

LOT LINES. The property lines along the edge of a lot or site.

FRONT LOT LINES. A lot line that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front line is the shortest of the lot lines which abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. See Figure 710-3.

Figure 710-3. Front & Side Lot Lines

Figure 710-4. Street Lot Lines

REAR LOT LINE. A lot line is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregular shaped lots, the rear lot line is all lot lines that are most nearly opposite the front lot line. See Figure 710-5.

Figure 710-5. Lot Lines on Irregular Lots

SIDE LOT LINE. A lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line. On a corner, the longer lot line which abuts a street, is a side lot line. See Figure 710-3.

STREET LOT LINE. Any lot lines that abut a street. Street lot line does not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. Street lot line can include front lot lines and side lot lines. See Figures 710-3 and 710-4.

LOT OF RECORD. A lot or parcel of land for which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorder with the appropriate county recorder.

LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines.

MANUFACTURED HOME. See Residential Structure Types.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A lot, tract, or parcel with four (4) or more spaces within five-hundred (500) feet of one another available for rent or lease for the siting of manufactured homes.

MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of land within a manufactured home park designed to accommodate one (1) manufactured home, on a rental or lease basis.

MICRO RETAIL POD. A collection of at least three (3) retail shops or services on the same site which are operated in small detached, prefabricated, or mobile structures no greater than six hundred (600) square feet in area. The micro retail pod also includes associated site amenities such as outdoor seating, landscaping, restrooms, and lighting.

MITIGATE. To rectify, repair, or compensate for impacts which result from other actions.

MOTOR HOME. See Recreational Vehicle, under Vehicle Types.

MOTOR VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.

MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE. See Residential Structure Types

NEW DEVELOPMENT. See New Development Definitions.

NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT. An element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking area that was crated in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development standards. Nonconforming development includes development that is over a maximum allowed amount of floor area, as long as the development does not include an amount of floor area that is specifically prohibited by the current development standards.

NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. A residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone.

NONCONFORMING SITUATION. A Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, or Nonconforming Use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also Nonconforming Residential Density, Nonconforming Development, and Nonconforming Use.

NONCONFORMING USE. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of the floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone.

NONDISCREATIONARY REVIEWS. A non-discretionary review is one where compliance with the regulations can be determined based on objective standards. Decisions are made ministerially; they do not required a public hearing or notice. Examples of these reviews include: whether the proposed use is or is not allowed, whether the site area is or is not large enough for the proposed number of housing units, and whether the proposed building meets all setbacks, height and parking requirements.

OPERATOR. A person undertaking a development, the proprietor of a use or development, or the owner of the land underlying a development.

OWNER. The owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.

OWNERSHIP. An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a shared right-of-way. See Figure 910-11. See also, Lot and Size.

PARKING AREA. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading. See also, Driveway, Garage, and Vehicle Areas.

PARKING SPACE. A space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle.

PASSENGER VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.

PAVED AREA. An uncovered hard surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as "Grasscrete"), that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas.

PERSON. Any person, partnership, association, or corporation.

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development that is based on a comprehensive design that addresses the entire complex of land, structures, and uses as a single project. The design plan for the project functions as a substitute for the general site development regulations of the zoning on the site.

PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

PRIMARY USE. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.

PROJECT. An existing or proposed development.

QUADPLEX. See Residential Structure Types.

RAIL RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. See Vehicle Types.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as Recreational Vehicle Parks. See also Mobile Home Park.

RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A residence for 6 to 15 physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition for Residential Facility.

RESIDENTIAL HOME. A residence for five or fewer physically or mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the State definition of Residential Home.

RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE TYPES

COTTAGE HOUSING. A grouping of no fewer than four (4) detached dwelling units per acre, each with a footprint of less than nine hundred (900) square feet, that includes a common courtyard. Individual attached garages up to two hundred (200) square feet shall be exempted from the calculation of maximum building footprint for cottages. Cottage housing may also be known as “cluster housing,” “cottage cluster,” “bungalow court,” “cottage court,” or “pocket neighborhood.”

DUPLEX. A structure that contains two (2) primary dwelling units on one (1) lot. These units may share common walls or common floor/ceilings.

DWELLING UNIT. A building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one (1) set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory, such as an outdoor grill.

GROUP LIVING STRUCTURE. A structure than contains sleeping areas and at least one (1) set of cooking and sanitary facilities that is used as a residence for group living uses.

HOUSE. A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, intended for permanent occupancy as a dwelling. All manufactured homes located in the City after the effective date of this Code shall meet or exceed the standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and shall have been constructed after June 15, 1976.

MULTI-DWELLING STRUCTURE. A structure that contains five (5) or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceiling with one (1) or more units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots. Multi-dwelling includes structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums.

QUADPLEX. A structure that contains four (4) primary dwelling units on one (1) lot. These units may share common walls or common floor/ceilings.

TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling unit constructed in a row of two (2) or more attached units, where each dwelling unit is located on an individual lot or parcel and shares at least one (1) common wall with an adjacent unit. A townhouse is also commonly called a “rowhouse,” “attached house,” or “common-wall house.”

TRIPLEX. A structure that contains three (3) primary dwelling units on one (1) lot. These units may share common walls or common floor/ceilings.

REVIEW BODY. The person or group who is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review body includes the Planning Commission and the City Council.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

SETBACK. The minimum distance required between a specified object such as a building and another point. Setbacks are usually measured from lot lines to a specified object. Unless otherwise indicated, an unspecified setback refers to a building setback. In addition, the following setbacks indicate where each setback is measured from. See Section 730 Measurements, for measurement information.

•Front Setback. A setback that is measured from a front lot line.

•Rear Setback. A setback that is measured from a rear lot line.

•Side Setback. A setback that is measured from a side lot line.

SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTAL. A short-term vacation rental (also called a vacation rental or STR) is defined as the rental of a residential dwelling unit, accessory dwelling unit, or rental of part of a residential dwelling unit or accessory dwelling unit for periods of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. The use is considered a commercial lodging use subject to zoning regulations and home occupancy standards.

SIGN RELATED DEFINITIONS

BILLBOARDS. Signs advertising merchandise or services other than those available for sale on the premises.

BUSINESS SIGNS. Sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, industry or service or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.

DISPLAY. The surface made available by the sign structure for the mounting of material to carry the advertising or other message, trademark or emblem.

DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. Sign with advertising on two (2) surfaces or plain back-to-back.

ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SYSTEM: A video display board of varying display quality up to television quality in which the rate of change is electronically programmed and capable of providing animated messaging, video clips, rapidly alternating messages, images or methods which achieve apparent movement through electrical pulsations, including strobe lights and bead lighting, or any other presentation that could distract drivers.

ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN OR CENTER. A permanent sign that uses changing lights to form a written vertical or horizontal message, or messages, in which the sequence of messages and rate of change is electronically programmed in a dot matrix configuration which may be changed intermittently. Video signs are not included in this definition.

FACE OF BUILDING. The wall of the building fronting on the street, excluding any appurtenances such as projecting columns, fins, pilasters, canopies, marquees, showcases or decorations, but including the parapet wall.

FINISH GROUND LEVEL (GRADE). The average elevation of the ground adjoining the structure or building upon which the sign is erected.

FREE-STANDING SIGN. Sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces which are fastened to or embedded in the ground or a foundation in the ground; fence signs are considered in this category.

GUIDE OR DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. Signs and sign structures which serve as directional guides to recognized areas of regional importance and patronage, including:

(1) Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional significance.

(2) Regional shopping centers maintaining a minimum of 100 parking spaces in the immediate vicinity.

(3) Major sports stadium, entertainment centers or convention centers having a seating capacity in excess of 1,000 persons.

(4) Recognized historical landmarks.

HEIGHT OF SIGN. The height of a sign shall be measured from the finished ground level, excluding mounds, berms and the like to the top of the sign or the highest portion of the sign structure or frame, whichever is greater.

LOCATION. A lot or premise or building wall or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is erected, constructed and/or maintained. See also City Zoning Ordinance.

MARQUEE OR READER BOARD (CHANGEABLE COPY) SIGN. A sign which is characterized by changeable copy, whether free-standing or wall sign or whether the sign projects from and/or is supported by a building.

MULTI-FACE SIGN. A multi-face sign is one with more than one (1) section or module.

NAMEPLATES. Signs identifying the name, occupation and/or profession of the occupant of the premises.

PARCEL, TRACT OR LOT. For the purpose of determining sign requirements shall mean any parcel, tract or lot of real property under separate ownership or lease of at least fifteen (15) years duration from any other parcel, tract or lot having street or highway frontage or in the event of an arterial street or freeway within two hundred (200) feet thereof.

PROJECTING SIGN. A sign which projects to within any public right-of-way except a wall sign as herein defined.

REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign or sign structure relating to the sale, lease or other disposition of real property.

ROOF LINE. The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet whichever forms the top line of a building silhouette; where a building has several roof levels, the roof line shall be the one belonging to that portion of the wall on which the sign is located.

ROOF SIGN. A sign located and/or maintained upon the roof of any building.

ROTATING OR REVOLVING SIGNS. A sign, all or a portion of which moves in some manner.

SIZE (SIGN). The size of a sign shall be the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which encloses the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character. The area of a sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram or a triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign computing the area of the parallelogram or a triangle. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign.

STRUCTURE. The supports, uprights, bracing, guy rods or lines, cables or framework of a sign or outdoor display.

TEMPORARY SIGN. Any advertising display or sign which shall appear or be located upon a particular parcel, tract or lot of real property for no more than sixty (60) days.

WALL SIGN. A sign fixed to the exterior wall of any building and which projects not more than sixteen (16) inches from the building wall but does not project above the parapet or eves of the building. (Ord. 10-2011)

SITE. An ownership except as follows:

•If a proposed development includes more than one ownership, then all the ownerships are included as the site.

•If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and if the proposal is for new development, then the site is the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

•If there is existing development on an ownership, then the entire ownership in included as the site. An exception is when the proposed development is separated from the existing development by landscaping, screening, setback, or buffering measures, as would be required if the proposed development was on a separate ownership. In this case, the site is the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

See also, Lot and Ownership.

STREET. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

STRUCTURE. See Development-Related Definitions.

SUBDIVISION AND LAND PARTITION RELATED

BUILDING LINE: A line on a plat or map indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected.

CROSSWALK: A right-of-way across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.

DEED RESTRICTIONS: A covenant or contract constituting a burden in the use of private property for the benefit of property owners in the same subdivision, adjacent property owners, the public or the City of Wood Village, and designed to mitigate or protect against adverse impacts of a development or use to ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.

EASEMENT: The grant of the legal right to use a strip of land for specific purposes.

PARCEL: A unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

PARTITION LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. “Partition land” does not include divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures; divisions of land resulting from the creation of cemetery lots; and divisions of land made pursuant to a court order, including but not limited to court orders in proceedings involving intrastate or interstate succession; and “partition land” does not include any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where and additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustment is not reduced below the minimum lot standards of this Code. Partitioned land does not include a sale or grant by a person to a public agency or public body for state highway, county road, city street or other right-of-way purposes provided that such road or right-of-way complies with the applicable comprehensive plan or ORS 215.213(2)(q) to (s) and 215.283(2)(p) to (r).

PARTITION PLAT: Partition plat includes a final map and other writing containing all the description, locations, specifications, provisions and information concerning a major or minor partition.

PEDESTRIAN WAY: A right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.

PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City of Wood Village.

PLAT: The final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision.

SIDEWALK: A pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing.

STREET: A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons on foot, in vehicles, or otherwise, to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land and including the term “road”, “highway”, “lane”, “avenue”, “alley”, “boulevard”, “parkway”, or similar designations.

(a) Alley: A narrow street generally through a block used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting another street.

(b) Arterial: A street used primarily for through traffic.

(c) Collector: A street used to some extent for through traffic but primarily for access to abutting properties.

(d) Cul-de-sac (dead-end street): A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turn-around.

(e) Half Street: A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in another subdivision.

(f) Marginal Access Street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

(g) Minor Street: A street intended primarily for access to abutting properties.

SUBDIVIDER: An individual firm or group who undertakes the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, and including changes in street or lot lines.

SUBDIVIDE LAND: To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year.

SUBDIVISION: Either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land subdivided as defined in this Code.

THROUGH LOT. See Lot, under Parcel Types.

THROUGH CONNECTION. A grade level pedestrian, cycling, or vehicle access route that is accessible to the public and extends through a city block, and includes but is not limited to a pedestrian walkway, a Street, or an access route through public or private land.

TOWN CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A Town Center Development Plan refers to information submitted by an applicant seeking approval for development within the Town Center Zone area. It includes, at a minimum, diagrams, narrative and other information as required by Section 235.400. The Town Center Development Plan explains how the applicant intends to meet the requirements of Chapter 235, including the requirements of Figure 235 – 1 (Concept Plan Regulating Diagram), and other applicable chapters and sections of the Wood Village Zoning and Development Code.

The Town Center Development Plan replaces the term Master Plan where it used to appear in Section 235.400, formerly 235.500.

TRANSPORTATION-RELATED DEFINITIONS

FREEWAY (EXPRESSWAY) (THRU-WAY): Such streets, highways or roads of the City of Wood Village as approved by appropriate State Agency.

RAIL RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public or private area that allows for the passage of people or goods. Right-of-way includes passageways such as freeways, streets, bike paths, alleys, and walkways. A public right-of-way is a right-of-way that is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency.

ROADWAY. The portion of a street that is improved for motor vehicular travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. Roadway does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

STREET. A public or private right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle travel or for motor vehicle access to abutting property. Street includes all the area within the right-of-way, such as roadways, parking strips, and sidewalks. For the purposes of this Title, street does not include alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or the interstate freeways and the Sunset highway including their ramps.

VEHICLE AREAS. All the area on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also, Driveway and Parking Area.

TRIPLEX. See Residential Structure Types.

VEHICLE TYPES.

MOTOR VEHICLE. Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles with motive power. See also Passenger Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle and Truck.

PASSENGER VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed to carry ten persons or less including the driver. Passenger vehicle also includes motor vehicles designed to carry ten persons or less that are constructed with on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road use. Passenger vehicle includes vehicles commonly called cars, minivans, passenger vans, and jeeps. Passenger vehicle is intended to cover the vehicles defined as passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. See also Recreational Vehicle and Truck.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for sport or recreational use, or which is designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. Recreational vehicle is divided into two categories as follows:

- MOTOR HOME. Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on a intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also Truck.

- ACCESSORY RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Accessory recreational vehicle includes non-motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis such as vacation trailers and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. Accessory recreational vehicle also includes vehicles designed for off-road use such as off-road vehicles, dune buggies, and recreational boats.

TRUCK. A motor vehicle which is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten persons. Truck includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. Truck is intended to cover the vehicles defined as trucks and buses by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. Trucks are divided into three categories by size as stated below. See also Passenger Vehicle, and Recreational Vehicle.

- LIGHT TRUCK. Light trucks are trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels.

- MEDIUM TRUCK. Medium trucks are trucks and similar vehicles, other than truck tractors, with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the Heavy Truck category.

- HEAVY TRUCK. Heavy trucks are trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles.

UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than 16 feet in length are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.

WASTE RELATED

DEMOLITION LANDFILL. A land disposal site for receiving, sorting and disposing only land clearing debris, including vegetation and dirt, building construction and demolition debris and inert materials, and similar substances.

HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE DEPOT. A facility for receiving, sorting, processing and temporarily storing household hazardous waste and for preparing that waste for safe transport to facilities authorized to receive, process, or dispose of such materials pursuant to federal or state law.

LIMITED PURPOSE LANDFILL. A land disposal site for the receiving, sorting and disposing of solid waste material, including but not limited to asbestos, treated petroleum contaminated soil, construction, land clearing and demolition debris, wood, treated sludge from industrial processes, or other special waste material other than unseparated municipal solid waste.

RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing and processing solid waste to obtain useful material or energy.

MIXED CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores, processes, and recovers recyclable material from mixed construction and demolition debris for reuse, sale, or further processing.

SOLID WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes solid waste by decomposing the organic portions of the waste by biological means to produce useful products including, but not limited to, compost, mulch and soil amendments.

MONOFILL. A land disposal site for receiving, sorting and disposing only one type of solid waste material or class of solid waste materials for burial, such as a facility that accepts only asbestos.

MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE DEPOT. A facility where sealed containers are received, stored up to 72 hours, staged, and/or transferred from one mode of transportation to another.

SMALL SCALE SPECIALIZED INCINERATOR. A facility that receives, processes, temporarily stores, and burns a solid waste product as an accessory use to a permitted use, including incinerators for disposal of infectious wastes as part of a medical facility, but not including mass burn solid waste incinerators, refuse-derived fuel technologies, human or animal remains crematorium, or any energy recovery process that burns unseparated municipal solid waste.

SOLID WASTE FACILITY. Any facility or use defined in Section 1 of this attachment.

SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION. A facility that receives, processes, temporarily stores and prepares solid waste for transport to a final disposal site, with or without material recovery prior to transfer.

TREATMENT AND STORAGE FACILITY. A facility subject to regulation under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC §§ 6901-6987, for receiving, sorting, treating, and/or temporarily storing hazardous waste, and for processing such waste for safe transport to facilities authorized to receive, treat, dispose of such materials pursuant to federal or state law. Treatment and storage facilities do not include facilities for on-site disposal of hazardous waste.

WOOD WASTE RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes untreated wood, which does not contain pressure treated or preservative treated wood, in the form of scrap lumber, timbers, or natural wood debris, including logs, limbs, and tree trunks, for reuse, recycling or energy recovery into products such as hogged fuel, fuel pellets, or fireplace logs.

YARD DEBRIS DEPOT. A facility that receives yard debris for temporary storage, awaiting transport to a processing facility.

YARD DEBRIS PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that receives, temporarily stores and processes yard debris into a soil amendment, mulch or other useful product through grinding and/or controlled biological decomposition

YARDS. A required open space, on a lot, such space being unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure, from the ground to the sky, except for permitted projecting building features and accessory structures when in conformance with this Code. Each yard shall be measured by striking a line parallel to the corresponding lot line the distance required by the setback standard of the base zone.

ZONE. Refers to land use regulatory zones (Districts) under the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wood Village. (Ord. 2-2022 § 1 (Att. A); Ord. 3-2021 § 1 (Exh. A); Ord. 2-2020 § 4 (Att. A); Ord. 3-2018 § 1 (Att. A))

Your Selections

What’s Nearby

Section

600 700 Tables

Section

710 720 730

Section

720.020 720.030

The Wood Village Development Code is current through Ordinance 3-2022, passed August 23, 2022.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder’s office has the official version of the Wood Village Development Code. Users should contact the City Recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.woodvillageor.gov
Hosted by ICC Code Solutions.
Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Cookie Preferences

Contents
×

All Publications

Municipal Code

Development Code

City Charter

Your Selections

Wood Village Municipal Code Wood Village Development Code Wood Village Charter

Expand All Collapse All

Share Clear
Close

View Full Table

View Full Image

View Full File
×

Go to Top Go to Bottom Share/Save Close

Save, Share, Bookmark or Print History of This Subsection
